༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
LCCN:
WOOKG02861
2002003925
ImageGroup:
ISBN:
11KG86200
0861713125
Title:
ལམ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་གང་ཟག་ལས་དང་པོ་པ་ལ་ཕན་པའི་བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་གནད་བསྡུས།
|lam zhugs kyi gang zag las dang po pa la phan pa'i bskyed rdzogs kyi gnad
bsdus/
Author:
འཇམ་མགོན་ཀོང་སྤྲུལ་བློ་གྲོས་མཐའ་ཡས་
"jam mgon kong sprul blo gros mtha' yas
Descriptor:
In/a
n/a;n/a
Original Publication:
Place:
boston
Publisher:
wisdom publications
1996, 2002
Date:
Volume:
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
Scanning Information:
n/a
n/a
Scanned at Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 1430 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA. Comments: 1/2018



Creation and Completion
ESSENTIAL POINTS OF
TANTRIC MEDITATION
JAMGÖN KONGTRUL
Translated and introduced by SARAH HARDING
with commentary by
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE



Uration
compligion



Creation & Completion
Essential Points of Tantric Meditation
JAMGÖN KONGTRUL LODRÖ THAYE
Introduced, translated, and annotated by
SARAH HARDING
Commentary by
KHENCHEN THRANGU RINPOCHE
Wisdom Publicacions. Boston



Wisdom Publications
199 Elm Street
Somerville MA 02:44 USA
www.wisdompubs.org
Introduction, translation, and notes Sarah Harding 1996, 2002
Commentary © Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, clectronic or mechani-
cal, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system or
technology now known or later developed, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kon-sprul Blo-gros-mtha'-yas, 1817-1899.
Lam íugs kyi gań zag ias das po pa la phan pa'i bskyed rdzogs kyi
gnad bsdus. English
Creation & completion : cssential points of tantric meditation/
Jamgön Kongtrul Lodró Thaye; introduced, translated, and annotated by
Sarah Harding : Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche,
P. cm.
Cover title: Creation and completion.
ISBN 0-86171-312-5 (alk. paper)
1. Meditation-Rhin-ma-pa (Soc). 2. Meditation-Tantric Buddhism.
3. Rhin-ma-pa (Sect)Rituais. I. Title: Creation and completion. II. Harding,
Sarah, 1953– III. Title.
BQ7662.6.K669612 2002
294.34435—dcz
2002003925
ISBN 0-86171-312-5
12 11 10 09 08
Cover design by Graciela Galup
Interior set in Gammond 10.8/14
Cover art: Detail of Chakrsamvara from Vajradhara thangka from the Robert Hatfield
Ellsworth collection. Photo © John Bigelow Taylor, NYC.
Wisdom Publications' books are printed on acid-frcc paper and meet the guidelines for perma-
nence and durability of the Committee on Production Guidclines for Book Longevity of the
Council on Library Resources.
This book was produced with Environmental Mindfulness. We have clected to print this
* citle on 50% PCW recycled paper. As a result, we have saved the following resources: 15
trces, 11 million BTUs of energy, 1,339 lbs. of greenhouse gases, 5,559 gallons of water, and
714 lbs. of solid wastc. For more information, please visit our website, www.wisdompubs.org.
Printed in the United States of America.



Contents
Foreword vii
Preface ix
Technical Note
xi
2
Introduction 1
Buddhism 2
Three Turnings of the Wheel of Dharma
Buddhism in Tibet 6
Deity Practice 7
The Guru II
Creation Stage 13
Completion Stage 16
Jamgön Kongtrul 20
Literary Works 24
27
Creation & Completion: The Root Text in Tibetan and English
The Essential Points of Creation and Completion That Will
Benefit the Beginner Who Has Entered the Path 29
Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche 83
Introduction 83
Essential Points for Approaching the Path 84
Essential Points for Traversing the Path 94
Purification 106
The Emergence of Confusion 120
Working with Confusion 134
Cultivating Lucidity 141
Notes 155
Bibliography
Index 181
177



Publisher's Acknowledgment
The Publisher gratefully acknowledges the Hershey Family Foundation for
kindly sponsoring the publication of this book.



MARPA INSTITUTE
Tor Tretilatore
toder the Spiritul Authority of
Thanpo Tuultri. Get#0 Alapoche
The end of this twentieth century la a time when people are extremely
busy, whether engaged in their work, family, or agaimilating & constant
stream of new information. Finding a place for the practice of Dharma within
such a complex and demanding world is not always easy, and so there 18 a
need Eor clear, Buccinct presentations of meditation theory and practice.
This distillation of essence requires the most accomplished master, one
who not only knowa deeply a vast range of texte, but who has also realized
the meaning of which they speak. Jamgön Kongtrul Lodra Thaye was such a
master. One of Tibet's greatest scholars, he was also a realized siddha,
who through his compassionate desire to benefit aentient beinge, Composed
this text on the central forms of practice within the Vajrayana, the cre-
Btion and completion stages of meditation. There is an almost uncountable
number of texts dealing with these topics, too many for any one person to
atudy or practice, and so this text summarizing the key pointe le extremely
useful. For new students, who do not know where to turn, it leade the way
along a direct and clear path and for old students, it gathera into one
place and codifies the main points of myriad explanatione.
Several years ago I suggedted to Sarah Harding that she translate this
composition, and I am very glad to see her work brought to completion. May
it be the cause of immense benefit for aentient beinge limitless in number,
Xhenpo teultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche
Post Box 4017, Kathawadite. Nepat.
TT
....
VIL



Preface
WHILE IN RETREAT from 1976 to 1980, I started reading Tibetan texts on
the subject of visualization in an attempt to understand what it was that I
was supposed to be doing, and why. There is a wealth of information in
Tibetan, and my research proved to be rewarding and reassuring. Since
the retreat, I've met many Western students of Tibetan Buddhism doing
visualization practice but without the benefit of explanation. Although
there is surprisingly little inquisitiveness a sign, no doubt, of great
faith-1 felt a desire to help fill this gap in the transmission of the
Dharma. In 1987, I translated a short text (bskyed rdzogs nyams len mdor
bsdus kyi gtam) of uncertain origin on this subject to use as a teaching
text. During this work, I asked Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche and
his assistant Tenpa Gyaltsen for clarification on certain points. At that
time, Khenpo Tsultrim introduced me to this text by Jamgön Kongtrul
(bskyed rdzogs gnad bsdus; Creation and Completion) and suggested that I
translate it. I found it listed in two separate tables of contents of
Kongtrul's collected works as being located in volume cha of the Treasury
of Vast Precepts (rgra chen bka' mdzod). However, the diligent efforts of
Susan Meinheit at the Library of Congress, and my own search through
the library of the late Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche, failed to turn up the
actual pages. Later, information from Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
revealed that this text had been missing ("borrowed" was the word) from
the original volumes when the more recent woodblocks were being pro-
duced. So all that came into my hands was the mysterious photocopy
from Khenpo Tsultrim
It sat on my desk for years. In 1990, during a time of intense personal
crisis, I turned for some reason to this text for refuge, translating furiously
for several weeks. At the time I thought that if I could have only one
book on a desert island, it would be this one. I reworked it over several
years, asking questions of whatever generous and learned lama passed my



Creation
Completion
way. In this regard, I would like especially to mention Bokar Rinpoche,
successor to Kalu Rinpoche and holder of the Shangpa lineage, Khenpo
Dönyö Rinpoche, Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, Khenpo Palden Sherab
Rinpoche, and Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche. In checking the
translation with the original, Tulku Thondup Rinpoche and Lobsang
Lhalungpa were extremely generous. And in reading the English transla-
tion and the introduction, Dr. Reginald Ray, Joey Townsend, and
Flercher Chamberlain offered useful suggestions and encouragement.
There were many others who contributed one way or another. I thank
them all. Finally, with the support of Constance Miller and Emily Bower
at Wisdom, it has at last reached some form of completion. In the trans-
lation of such a profound teaching, the work of improvement could have
continued on for much longer, perhaps forever. But it seems time to
share it with others, according to the original intention, and accept
responsibility for any errors or mediocrity, praying that the original
power comes through despite such failings. The effort is dedicated to the
continuing beneficial influence of the activities of the great Kyabje Kalu
Rinpoche.
Sarah Harding
Boulder, Colorado, 1996
Acknowledgments to the Revised Edition
The publisher wishes to thank Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche for kindly
allowing the inclusion of his commentary in this new edition of Creation
and Completion. The commentary is based on an oral translation by
Lama Yeshe Gyamtso that was transcribed by Jan Puckett and the staff
of the Rigpe Dorje Center in San Antonio, Texas, where the teachings
were given. Pema Tsewang Shastri input the Tibetan text in this new
edition, and Lyn Miller and E. Gene Smith provided invaluable editorial
assistance.



Technical Note
THE PROBLEM OF PRESENTING Tibetan works to the English-speaking pub-
lic is complicated, but I will attempt to clarify my logic here. The acade-
mic world uses a system of transliterating Tibetan into roman letters
developed by Turrell Wylie at the University of Washington. This I have
used in the notations for the benefit of those involved in Tibetan studies.
But since the Wylie system is illegible to the uninitiated, I have also used
my own phonetic system with Tibetan names and commonly known
terms in the introduction and translation. There is no single system of
English phonetics for Tibetan, due in part to the variety of Tibetan
dialects, but mostly due to the fact that the English sounds just do not
correspond exactly to the Tibetan. Therefore, my system is to write down
as closely as possible what it sounds like to me when spoken by, say, a civ-
ilized Khampa, while still keeping it very simple. The only exceptions are
words whose spellings have become commonly accepted, such as
Rinpoche, rather than Rimpochay (and certainly not Rinbochay).
Sanskrit equivalents are given in the footnotes following the Tibetan,
using the accepted diacritic notation. Diacritics have been dropped in the
main text as unnecessary and not aesthetic. When no Sanskrit equivalent
appears in the footnotes, it is because I was unable to find one.
Occasionally, common Sanskrit words are used if they are more recogniz-
able than their Tibetan or English equivalents, such as "buddha" or
"karma." Only the first occurrence of a Sanskrit or Tibetan word is itali-
cized. My purpose throughout is to try to present the impact and beauty
of the original meaning without encumbering the reader with unneces
sary impediments. English is an extremely rich, subtle, and flexible lan-
guage, unjustly accused of being inadequate to convey spiritual truths.
While we wait for some standard in the field of Buddhist studies, it seems
best to employ that wealth for the sake of communication, rather than
depend too much on the safety of foreign terms.



Introduction
THE TIBETAN TEXT translated here is a concise yet thorough exposition of
the essentials of Tibetan Buddhist meditation practice by one of the most
brilliant minds of that tradition, Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Thaye (1813–99).
The Tibetan title of the text is lam zhugs kyi gang zag las dang po pa la phan
pa'i bskyed rdzogs kyi gnad bsdus, "The Essential Points of Creation and
Completion That Will Benefit the Beginner Who Has Entered the Path."
It is known to Tibetans simply as Kye Dzog Ne Dü (bskyed rdzogs gnad
bsdus), or "Essential Points of Creation and Completion." Creation (or
development) and completion (or perfection)' refer to the two stages of
meditation involving deity visualization practice, a meditation technique
for which Tibetan Buddhism is widely known. The text is not a specific
meditation in itself, but rather describes the meaning and effect of such
practice, and in doing so the essential Buddhist outlook on the nature of
mind and reality. It describes with masterful clarity the profound view and
vast method within which meditation practice must occur.
Jamgön Kongtrul designed this text as a guide to meditation practice. It
is written entirely in verse, in the style of the songs of realization and other
inspirational spiritual literature of Tibet, following a very similar tradition
in ancient India. It is not an in-depth analysis or scholarly treatise. Jamgön
Kongtrul, a masterful scholar, was above all interested in the actual applica-
tion of the teachings in meditation. His intention in this text was to con-
vey just what was necessary for effective practice. The intention in translat-
ing and publishing it is the same: simply to make it available for people
interested in Buddhist practice. Although each verse warrants a volume of
commentary, this might just result in obscuring the essential points. So
what is offered here is a minimum of commentary, just enough to provide
some context.



Creation d Completion
Buddhism
The Buddhist teachings originated in India in the sixth century B.C.E. with
Gautama, or Shakyamuni Buddha, the prince who renounced his king-
dom in search of wisdom. After an inner journey of many years, he experi-
enced a total awakening, or enlightenment,' and went on to teach about
this experience for forty-five years.
India at that time already had a strong tradition of contemplative prac-
tice, but these new teachings were unusual not only in their content but in
that they reached across social and religious boundaries in their appeal.
They offered to everyone equally the possibility of achieving liberation
through personal effort. During the forty-five years that Buddha
Shakyamuni traveled around India imparting his profound knowledge,
many different aspects of it were presented in many different ways to a
great variety of people. This special talent to present the truth (Dharma) in
the way that is most practical and appropriate to a particular audience is
called skillful means. It is symbolically represented in the account of one
of the Buddha's special qualities of speech: that he could deliver a dis-
course to a group of people all speaking different languages, and they
would each hear it in their own language.
Three Turnings of the Wheel of Dharma
THE FIRST TURNING
The great variety of Buddhist teachings that arose in India over the next
millennium are classified into the three "turnings of the wheel of
Dharma.". They are all said to originate with the Buddha Shakyamuni
during different phases of his teachings, at different places, speaking to dif-
ferent audiences, sometimes simultaneously to different audiences. In the
first phase, the four noble cruths were emphasized: the truth of suffering,
its cause, its cessation, and the path to its cessation. Since the first pair
describe the reality of our experience of life cyclic existence (samsara)
and the second pair encompass all the modes of transcendence of it (nir-
vana), there is nothing not included in this simple classification.



Introduction
Among the important concepts revealed during this phase was the
explanation of the totally dependent and interrelated nature of all phe-
nomenal reality. This is said to be the overarching vision that the Buddha
experienced during the night of his awakening. If one can understand the
intricate relationship of all phenomena, and particularly of one's own emo-
tional and conceptual patterns, then the cycle of suffering can be broken.
An in-depth analysis of the process of suffering also reveals that the notion
of an intrinsically, independently existing "self" is at the bottom of it. This
is considered to be a false notion, since upon direct examination through
meditation and analysis, such a self cannot be found. Ignorance is the
belief in this myth of the self and the dualistic thinking that it spawns. In
protecting the self and distinguishing what is other than it, the emotional
reactions of attachment and aversion along with many other "afflictive
emotions occur. These in turn give rise to actions and their consequences
(karma). These are the sources of suffering. So the idea of nonself' is
another crucial idea presented in the first turning teachings. These con-
cepts form the basis for all further developments in Buddhist thought.
The people who received, practiced, and accomplished the teachings of
this early phase of Buddhism were called arhat. This group includes most
of the earliest disciples. The lifestyle that was stressed was one of renuncia-
tion and moral discipline, and the goal was to attain one's own liberation
from the cycle of existence. These teachings developed over time into at
least eighteen separate schools. Today they are represented by the School of
the Elders (Theravada), prevalent in Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, and
Cambodia. This path was later called the "Lesser Vehicle" (Hinayana) by
other traditions.
THE SECOND TURNING
The second phase of teachings coincided with the wisdom literature," a
new phase of literature that began to spread between 100 B.C.E. and too
C.E. and continued to develop for centuries. The two great ideas empha-
sized in this phase were emptiness and compassion.2 Emptiness is a fur-
ther development of nonself and of the interdependent nature of phe-
nomena. Not only was the self discovered to be empty of any indepen-
dent existence, but so too was all phenomena. The lack of independent



Creation or Completion
existence of phenomena is emptiness, and this truth is called the absolute
truth.'' On an ordinary level, the interrelated existence of phenomena
and the functioning of cause and effect (karma) are considered the rela-
tive truth." To comprehend these two truths simultaneously is to main-
tain a "middle path" without falling into extreme notions of either exis-
tence or non-existence. With no ground to stand on and no concepts to
cling to, the causes of suffering are no longer operating. This is wisdom,
the opposite of ignorance, which must be perceived experientially
through meditative practice, not only by philosophical contemplation.
Compassion is the recognition that other beings are embroiled in lives
of suffering exactly because they lack this understanding of emptiness.
Their suffering is not inevitable, but it is self-perpetuating unless insight
into the cyclic pattern arises. The person who begins to comprehend the
true nature of emptiness naturally feels less self-cherishing and develops
concern for others who exist interdependently. Compassion in turn pro-
motes the experience of selflessness. Thus compassion and emptiness, or
wisdom, are seen as the two necessary qualities to cultivate together on the
Buddhist path, like the two wings of a bird.
The people who received, practiced, and accomplished these teachings
were called bodhisattvas." The lifestyle emphasized was one of great com-
passion and good deeds for the sake of others, as well as meditative disci-
pline. For this, a monastic life was not necessarily relevant, so laypeople
could be equally involved. The goal was the full enlightenment of all
sentient beings, and thus it came to be called the "Great Vehicle," or
Mahayana.
THE THIRD TURNING
The third phase was again based on these same concepts, but with a fur-
ther development, that of buddha nature, the inherent potential for
enlightenment. This seemed to spring out of the meditative experience of
a radiant awareness, or knowing capacity, inherent in the mind that could
not exactly be just empty. Speculation on emptiness can lead to the ques-
tion of whether the essential nature of everything is empty of a concrete
self and other dualistic notions, or whether everything is truly empty in
and of itself. The direct experience of intrinsic awareness would tend to



Introduction
indicate the former, and this essence that could be experienced came to be
called buddha nature. This nature is an integral part of every single sen-
tient being and endows that being with the opportunity to become
enlightened. Enlightenment then comes to mean the recognition and full
realization of this true nature of the buddha that one already is.
The goal is still the liberation of all sentient beings, and so the teachings
of this turning belong to the Mahayana, and the practitioners are bodhi-
sattvas. The literature connected with this phase as well as with the first
two turnings are called sutras," the discourses attributed to Buddha
Shakyamuni. The idea of buddha nature that developed in this last phase is
crucial for an understanding of another kind of literature that existed in
Buddhist India, that of the tantras.
TANTRA
Tantra refers to a special kind of literature of esoteric teachings and also
to those teachings themselves and their practice. The path of tantra is also
called Vajrayana," the "Indestructible Vehicle." Thus it is often classified
as a third vehicle, although it is actually part of the Mahayana since the
intention is the liberation of all beings. Another name for it is the secret
mantra, "20 reflecting the widespread use of special sounds and syllables
called mantras. There were both Hindu and Buddhist tantras in ancient
India, and it is unclear how much one influenced the other. The Buddhist
tantras are said to have been taught by the Buddha Shakyamuni manifest-
ing in various forms on specific occasions to special groups of adepts. The
main emphasis in Buddhist tantras is the natural purity or intrinsic perfec-
tion of all being. The method for realizing this is to cultivate pure vision,
or sacred outlook, at all times. The lifestyle tends to emphasize the uncon-
ventional in order to break through ordinary barriers and personal inhibi-
tions to a nonconceptual understanding of true nature. The techniques
that are taught in the tantras are visualization of enlightened forms (deities
and mandalas) and cultivation of the subtle energies of the psycho-
physical body, along with recognition of the ultimate inherent nature.
These two are the stages of creation and completion that are the subject of
the text translated here.



Creation of Completion
Buddhism in Tibet
In additi actual pracoitation of co
Buddhism in Tibet and the other Himalayan regions not only preserved
all of these strands of Buddhist thought without denigration or contra-
diction, but it also maintained a tradition of actual practice incorporating
all the vehicles in an effective way. In addition, it encompassed the prac-
tices of the native Bön religion already present in Tibet when it first
spread there, thus becoming the rich treasure of spiritual wisdom that we
still benefit from today.
Buddhism may have entered Tibet as early as the fifth century C.E., but
it was during the reign of several religious kings from the seventh to ninth
centuries that it became the established religion. King Trisong Detsen
invited the great scholar-monk Shantarakshita,* who founded the monas-
tic lineage, and the tantric master Guru Padmasambhava," who brought
the esoteric teachings of Buddhism and subdued opposition from local
forces. This first spreading of the Dharma in Tibet established the
Nyingma, or Ancient, School, which continues today. After a dark peri-
od, when the anti-Buddhist king Langdarmasuppressed the religion, the
later spreadingot took place in the eleventh century, with a new influx of
great teachers from India and new translations of sacred texts. Eight main
practice lineages flourished, as well as many smaller ones. From those, the
four main schools, which are well known today, were established: the
Nyingma, Kagyu, Sakya, and Gelug.
Many great saints and scholars from these traditions have appeared con-
tinuously in the Himalayan regions and have contributed richly to the
great treasury of Buddhist literature that had been brought from India and
translated into Tibetan.
In terms of practical application, scholars such as Jamgön Kongtrul
have simply classified all those teachings and practices into the two
approaches of sutra and mantra, representing, roughly, exoteric and eso-
teric. The sutra approach encompasses the general methods and ideas
expressed in the three turnings of the wheel of Dharma. In our text,
Kongtrul summarizes that approach with the famous verse:
Doing no unvirtuous deed whatsoever,
engaging in prolific virtuous activity,



Introduction
completely controlling one's own mind,
this is the teaching of the Buddha.31
The approach of mantra (Secret Mantra Vehicle) or tantric Buddhism
is basically the two stages of creation and completion. But to try to practice
them without the ethical foundation and mental control gained through
the sutra approach is considered useless, at best. Kongtrul thus advises us in
this small meditation guide on ways to practice ail of the characteristic
methods of both approaches. He summarizes them into three techniques
for dealing with the afflictive emotions: rejection, transformation, and
recognition (spang bsgyur shes grum). These three techniques for dealing
with emotions that would interfere with the meditation process clearly cor-
respond to the three phases of teachings described above as the three turn-
ings. Rejection of afflictive emotion reinforces the attitude of renunciation
so important in the First Turning teachings. The second turning teachings
are applied in transforming so-called negative states into conducive condi-
tions on the spiritual path through meditations based on compassion and
the realization of emptiness. Finally, recognition of one's own true nature,
which is intrinsically pure and pervasive even within one's affects, repre-
sents the ideas of buddha nature expressed in the third turning as they are
applied in the practices of secret mantra. In Tibetan Buddhism this
involves primarily meditation using visualized forms representing the
awakened mind: the deities and mandalas.
Deity Practice
Tibetan Buddhist spiritual practice centers around the deities in its devo-
tional rituals and meditation techniques. It may be disconcerting for those
who have heard that Buddhism is a "nontheistic" religion to discover an
elaborate system of worship with a pantheon of goddesses and gods. It is
for this reason that some other Buddhist schools have considered the
Buddhism in Tibet to be corrupt or untrue to its original form. However,
these deity practices are deeply rooted in the very foundations of Buddhist
thought and represent an exceptionally skillful use of technique to evoke
realization of those ideas on the deepest levels.



Creation om Completion
One can impure emptiness logically when an independent reality of the
self or of other phenomena is sought and not found. One also experiences
it directly through meditation when the mind abides without ideas of exis-
tence or non-existence or both or neither. Meditators experience emptiness
as a kind of fullness. Emptiness allows for the unimpeded radiance of
intrinsic awareness. In the experiential sense, then, it is not only a lack of
something, but also a quality of knowing, or pristine cognition, a luminous
quality that is the actual nature of the mind that can be experienced once
the veils of concepts and emotions have been cleared away. This experience
is often referred to as clear light or radiance (od gsal) and also as "compas-
sion." It is not something other than emptiness, for without emptiness it
could not occur. It is the radiance-awareness that is the primordially pure
basis of all manifestation and perception, the buddha nature.
This very nature of mind was always already there and is never corrupted
or damaged, but only covered up by confusion. As such, it is the basis of
spiritual practice, and also the goal or result. For this reason, tantra is called
the resultant vehicle, because the approach is to rediscover the result
already within. Buddha is not found anywhere outside of the intrinsic state
of one's own mind. In the traditional breakdown, then, of ground, path,
and fruition, the ground is one's own true nature, the fruition is the discov-
ery of that, and the path is whatever it takes to make the discovery.
Kongtrul describes the identity of ground (basis) and fruition when he says:
The basis of purification is the eternal, noncomposite realm of
reality that fully permeates all beings as the buddha nature. 95
Since every aspect of ourselves is intrinsically pure, the path can employ
any method to bring us back to our own nature. The deities used in tantric
practice are a manifestation of this pure nature. In one sense, they exist as a
method to undermine our pathetic projection of ourselves and our uni-
verse as flawed, a way of connecting with our true human/buddha nature.
At the same time, they are that nature.
Due to the complex process involved in engendering and maintaining a
sense of a substantial self and of the world around us, we have lost touch
with our basic nature. It is often explained that the actual emptiness nature
of mind is misconstrued as a self, while the clear or radiant aspect is



Introduction
projected outward as the separate, external world of others. * As the confusion
proliferates, the concepts of duality, feelings of attachment and aversion,
and consequent karmic actions and imprints become self-perpetuating.
Thus it is called cyclic existence and is characterized by the experience of
suffering. ** But the essential nature of emptiness and clarity has never for a
moment been absent.
In contemplative practice we can watch this process in our minds
moment by moment and recognize how we create our world. Then there is
the possibility of creating it consciously. Now, because of the complications
of our confusion, we visualize the world and ourselves as a mixture of bad
and good, creating a constant tension of dissatisfaction. But we could choose
to regard it as continuously manifesting the basic purity of emptiness/aware-
ness. The deities represent an alternate reality that more precisely reflects the
innate purity of our minds. In any case we visualize and create a world with
its beings. The tantric approach is to use whatever we have, whatever we do
already, as the method. So we use this capacity of projection and creation,
which is really the unimpeded radiance of mind, as the path of meditation,
but with a radical shift. Instead of imperfect women and men, we have god-
desses and gods embodying the buddha qualities. Rather than run-down
houses, there are brilliant palaces in divine configurations. The whole sorry
world, in fact, is the buddha realm of magnificent glory manifesting as the
mandala pattern of enlightened mind.
Emptiness and pure awareness allow us to do this. Deity visualization
may seem contrived, and it is acknowledged as such, but if the fact that we
create our own version of reality is deeply understood, it is very reasonable.
We perceive water as something to drink, a fish perceives it as something
to live in. We perceive the world now as impure, but we might as well see
it as pure, which is closer to the truth if one considers its essential nature.
The deities are forms that display the immanence of buddha nature in
everything. All the different ways of relating with deities are ways we
already have of relating to our experience. In this sense, the practice of
deity meditation is a skillful way of undermining our ordinary mistaken
sense of solid reality and moving closer to a true mode of perception.
The natural array of perceptions and feelings that arises can be regarded
differently through deity practice. For instance, in Jamgön Kongtrul's last
example of transformation, when desire arises, it arises as the deity, and we



Creation
Completion
relate to it, or to ourselves, in that form. The deity shares some familiar
characteristics with desire, has the same energy, but is by nature a pure
manifestation, untainted by ego's complications. The deity in this medica-
tion might be an embodiment of pure (com)passion, such as Chakra-
samvara," and thus represent an aspect of enlightenment. But the process
itself also recaptures and demonstrates that the essential nature of neurotic
thought is none other than buddha nature, whatever its shape. By creatively
using forms that recall innate purity, the habitual mistake of relating to
thoughts and emotions as other than pure is reversed.
This does not mean that tantric deities are merely an abstract, symbolic
form representing something other than themselves. This again would be a
dualistic concept. They are enlightened form, and they are intrinsic as part
of buddha nature. Even the specific forms are understood as an integral
part of awareness. This is a difficult point to comprehend. Jamgön
Kongtrul refers to this truth when he says:
The basis of purification, which is this very buddha nature,
abides as the body with its clear and complete vajra signs and marks.
A similar form is used as the path and leads to
the fruition of purification: that very divine form that existed as
the basis.37
"A similar form...used as the path" is the deity visualized in creation-stage
medication. Such practice leads to the realization of that divine form as it
already exists within the true nature of mind. The idea of the intrinsic
qualities of enlightenment, including actual physical attributes, can be
found in such early texts as the Uttaratantral and other sutras and com-
mentaries associated with the teachings ascribed to the third turning.
Qualities and activity manifest from the fundamental enlightened nature
in response to the needs of sentient beings, and yet are inseparable from
that very nature, not something added on to it. In the Uttaratantra, thirty-
two specific attributes of the form manifestation are listed, concluding
with the reminder that they are intrinsic and inseparable:
Those qualities of thirty and two
are distinguished through the dharmakaya;



Introduction
yet they are inseparable like a gem's
radiant color and its shape.99
Different dimensions or manifestations of the enlightened principle,
buddha, are traditionally called bodies (kaya). The most common division is
into three bodies. The body of reality (dharmakaya) is the ultimate true
nature, beyond concept. Buddha nature refers to the same thing when it is
obscured by the incidental veils in sentient beings. Although itself without
form, this body of reality manifests spontaneously in ways to benefit beings,
just as our intrinsic awareness radiates naturally from emptiness. The
enlightened manifestations are called the form bodies (rupakaya). They are
the body of perfect rapture (sambhogakaya), only visible to those of high real-
ization; and the emanation body (nirmanakaya), che actual manifestations of
the Buddha to our normal perceptions. The Buddha Shakyamuni is said to
be such an emanation body. The deities visualized in Tibetan meditation
practice for the most part represent the body of perfect rapture. When visu-
alized for purposes of meditation or ceremony, the deity is called yidam,
that which binds the mind.
It is taught that the practice of visualizing deities plants the seed for our
later manifestation of form bodies for the benefit of beings at the time of
enlightenment. This is why the seemingly simple approach of directly
apprehending the empty, radiant nature of mind is not enough. The body
of reality alone would be the result of that apprehension. But that would
be, in a sense, emptiness without form, and would accomplish only one's
own purpose. The body of reality must be accessible somehow to sentient
beings in whom it is still hidden. That is the natural function of the form
manifestations. It is still necessary to work with the whole phenomenal
world, form and emptiness inseparable.
The Guru
The single most important factor in effective tantric practice of any kind is
the relationship between the practitioner and the spiritual master.
Although a teacher is also stressed in the other approaches, it is only in the
Mantrayana approach that this relationship iself forms the basis of a spiritual



Creation
Completion
evolution. Thus the covenant (dam eshig Skt. samaya) between master and
disciple must be carefully guarded and honored at all times from both sides
or the process won't work. Given the difficulties of relationships in
general, and the delicacy and profundity of this tantric relationship in par-
ticular, it is not surprising that many misunderstandings and abuses have
occurred, particularly in the West, where a committed, devotional relation-
ship to another human being is quite alien and often confused with a per-
sonality cult. Although these problems require extensive consideration,
here we are discussing the ideal.
The relationship with the guru informs both creation-stage and
completion-stage practice. In the creation stage, it constitutes the connect-
ing factor between one's own buddha nature and the visualized deity, which
is always conceived of as essentially the guru. The guru becomes the exter-
nal, identifiable form of the ultimate buddha. All buddha qualities are pro-
jected and identified with the guru. Longing and devotion directed toward
the guru are so intensified that one is moved to the very core of one's being;
one's heart is fully opened, providing the space for connection, that is,
blessing, to occur. In the development of this relationship, there is more
and more capacity for intimacy until finally full union takes place: the
guru's mind and the disciple's mind are recognized as identical (thugs yid
dbyer med), and all the enlightened attributes of the guru are reclaimed as
one's own. This is the fruition of deity practice and specifically the recogni-
tion attained in the completion stage. As the hallmark of tantric practice,
guru devotion employs as its means perhaps the most powerful factor of
human existence—relationship—both to others and to "other" in an
abstract sense. Working with the general projection of self and other, and
even more, with all the feelings and affections one develops in relationships,
deity practice skillfully uses these affects themselves in devotional practice in
order to transcend them.
Ultimate completion stage is direct recognition of our fundamental
nature, but it is impossible to approach with the conceptual mind. How
can we even begin to recognize nonconceptual pure nature? It is like the
eye trying to see the eye. The mystery of tantra is that the only thing to do
is to pray to the guru for realization to dawn, because there is no other
thing to do. A pithy text on great seal (mahamudra), a practice for realiza-
tion of the ultimate nature, says:



Introduction
Mahamudra has no cause;
faith and devotion are the cause of mahamudra.
Mahamudra has no condition;
the holy lama is the condition for mahamudra.“
In the usual sense of "cause," there is nothing that can cause mahamudra,
the ultimate realization. The relationship of devotion is the only attitude
that creates the condition for it to happen. This is why the guru plays such a
crucial role in Vajrayana. In Creation and Completion the pre-eminent role
of the guru relationship is indicated in the first line of homage to Jamgön
Kongtrul's primary guru. It is taken for granted as the foundation of the
practices that are being described. The consummating event in that guru-
disciple relationship, the initiation or empowerment,"2 is not mentioned,
but assumed. Without empowerment from the guru, the practitioner will
not reap the benefits of deity practice. It is customary for a student to
request a ritual empowerment for each deity to be practiced in order to be
fully empowered both in the sense of permission to do the practice and of
establishing the relationship and receptivity needed for such practice.
Creation Stage
Visualization practice works with our relationship to the phenomenal
world of appearance and seeks to undermine its solidity and shift it into an
alternate, awakened perspective. The word often used for this process is
jong wa (sbyong ba), which has a wide range of meanings, including to
purify, purge, train, exercise, study, accustom, and cultivate. In this transla-
tion, “purify" is used in the sense of a thorough workover and radical shift.
Four aspects of purification are mentioned as a framework for understand-
ing. The basis, or ground, of purification is buddha nature. That which
needs purifying or removing are the conceptual and emotional obscura-
tions to this nature, which are merely incidental and not intrinsic to it.
That which does the purifying is deity practice. The fruition of purification
is full recognition of the ground.
The discussion of the actual purification process can be very obscure,
and this text really only gives us some clues, as do most Tibetan lamas.



Creation & Completion
Apparently this is all that is really necessary for it to "work." Deity practice
takes place within the framework of a ritual, liturgical text called a "means
of accomplishment" (sgrub thabs, Skt. sadhana). There is great variety in
the sequence of practices within these texts, depending on which level of
tantra and which tradition they belong to. Different relationships with the
deity are cultivated, such as that of lord, friend, and sibling, and then total
identification through visualization of oneself as the deity.** But there are
many common aspects as well. The general idea is that the process and
sequence of visualizations correspond exactly to certain experiences of our
life cycle, and that through "re-envisioning them in this pure way, the
process is basically recreated or purified, and can be recognized as the pure
display of radiant mind.
Jamgön Kongtrul mentions four visualization sequences" as corre-
sponding to the four possible kinds of birth: womb, egg, moisture-warmth,
or miraculous. The first sequence of five stages* purifying womb birth is
given as an example to convey this idea. Beginning with the three medita-
tive absorptions (ting nge 'dzin; samadhi), the first, absorption of suchness
(de bzhin nyid), corresponds to the experience of death in one's previous
life. This absorption is basically the meditation on emptiness, the pure
ground from which everything arises. Along with this, the all-appearing or
all-illuminating absorption (kun snang), corresponds to and purifies the
previous experience of the intermediate stare (bar do) between death and
rebirth. This is the meditation of the clarity or compassionate aspect, the
natural radiance of emptiness, the energy of the natural mind. Then the
absorption of the cause, or seed (rgyu), corresponds to the process of concep-
tion in rebirth, the sperm and ovum coming together as the physical basis
of the future body. Here it is described as the visualization of the sun and
moon and lotus seat, the first appearance of form in the visualization
process." In its pure, enlightened aspect, it is the inseparability of the pre-
vious two, emptiness and its radiance, compassion. Then there is the visu.
alization of the deity's seed syllable upon the seat, corresponding to the
consciousness of the individual entering the womb with the combination
of sperm and ovum. Just as all life begins with a seed or quintessence of
that form, deities also emanate from a quintessential syllable or vibration,
Then the visualization of the special implement or insignia (phyag mohan),
such as a vajra or a sword, representing the particular deity, corresponds to
14



Introduction
feral growth in the womb, when one's distinctive characteristics begin to
develop. Finally, the visualization of the complete body of the deity corre-
sponds to and purifies the actual birth from the womb and the develop-
ment into an individual. These five stages may also be correlated with the
five wisdoms, the pure aspect of the five afflictive emotions.*
In the more complex deiry practices, the process continues through
many stages, all the stages of our life. Finally there may be full-blown visu-
alization of the entire mandala palace and surrounding environment,
including many other deities as retinue in the mandala. This mandala cor-
responds to our complex life, with all of its relationships to beings, and to
the environment surrounding our notion of ourself in concentric circles of
importance all around. We have already created this mandala, but without
awareness. Recreating the process in visualization, we see how we did it in
the first place, and how, as the natural process of the creative energy of
mind, it is essentially pure already.
THREE ASPECTS OF THE CREATION STAGE
Traditionally there are three aspects, or techniques, to develop in visualiza-
cion practice: clarity, recollecting purity, and pride. Clarity of form (ram
par gsal ba) is the art of visualizing with steady, vivid precision. The deity is
held in the mind clearly, yet is always empty of solid reality, like a vivid
rainbow. This is not only a focus for achieving one-pointed attention (rtse
gcig) and stillness (zhi gnas, Skt. shamata), but also provides instant feed-
back on the state of one's mind. It is immediately apparent that a relaxed
mind is a necessary condition for sustained visualization, as it is for any
kind of exercise in memory. Advice on how to cultivate this clarity is given
in the text.
Recollecting the purity means knowing and remembering the symbolic
meaning of each of the aspects of the visualized deity. These meanings are
usually found in the course of the practice liturgy to refresh the memory
for practice. For instance, the deity's legs crossed in vajra posture indicates
abiding in the inseparability of cyclic existence and transcendence; sitting
on a lotus indicates utter purity of the form manifesting for beings, like a
lotus growing in a swamp but untouched by its filch. None of these details
are arbitrary, and as manifestations of the body of reality, they are naturally
meaningful and potent. As such, one might wonder if they are equally



Creation
Completion
effective whether or not they are consciously remembered. It is interesting
that in this text Jamgön Kongtrul goes against mainstream teachings in
suggesting that all this recollecting might just interfere with the real medi-
tation process, particularly for the beginner. He suggests that rather than
cluttering the mind with these details, it is more important to simply recall
that the mind projecting the empty, radiant deity is fundamental empti-
ness radiating its intrinsic qualities in the arising of hands, faces, and so on.
The third aspect to cultivate is called pride of the deity or divine pride
(thai nga rgyal). Generally, this means maintaining the deep sense of actu-
ally being the deity, pure and perfect in every way. It is not the feeling of
dressing up in a costume and mask, assuming another weird form, or super-
imposing an alien personality on top of the old one. A sense of confidence
in being the actual deity counteracts one's sense of ordinariness and frees
one from all the limitations usually imposed by our mundane sense of self.
As the deity, boundless compassion and wisdom are only natural, whereas
normally we feel burdened by our own inadequacy in such matters. Many
teachings emphasize this as the main point of deity practice. Even if the
visualization itself is unclear, just this sense of actually being the deity
achieves the purpose of the practice. However, pride of the deity is in no
way to be confused with its opposite: ordinary, ego-oriented pride.
Apparently Jamgön Kongtrul felt that this was very important: the two lines
on the subject concern the benefit of meditating without (ordinary) pride.
Kongtrul's discussion of creation-stage practice ends with a description
of the signs of accomplishment, such as the deity arising effortlessly at all
times and even being visible to others. But even if these experiences don't
happen and the visualization remains obscured, that obscuration itself is
not different from the true spacious nature of mind itself. It always comes
back to that. So the real accomplishment of the creation stage is the nat-
ural state of the completion stage.
Completion Stage
The true nature of mind and all phenomena is "beyond intellect and inex-
pressible. **There is no intentional effort that causes its realization except
that, as the text says, "the power of devotion causes it to arise from



Introduction
within."** This makes it difficult to write about, but a few points need to be
mentioned.
The creation stage undermines attachment to the solid, impure phe-
nomenal world, but can still leave us with the traces of attachment to this
new manifestation that we have created or perceived. So in the completion
stage, the whole new wonderful world dissolves back into basic ground,
from which it never really departed. In the context of relationship with life
cycles mentioned above, this stage corresponds to death. Recognizing that
the visualization was created in the first place by mind, empty and radiant,
and dissolves back into it, purifies or prepares us for the process of actual
death, when this realization can result in full awakening.
Within the context of meditation, there is no longer a visualized form
to work with, but there is still mind. So the discussion of the completion
stage begins with a description of the mental process itself, so that the
practitioner can be aware of exactly what is happening. The tradition of
examining and analyzing the mental process has been a mainstay of
Buddhist practice since its inception. It is sometimes referred to as
Buddhist psychology. In this text the discussion centers on the eight
aggregates of consciousness," a model of the perceptive process that
emerged during the development of the Mahayana. The purpose of the
detailed analysis is for the medicator to be able to recognize and interfere
in the process at just that precise point before mental events imprint on
the foundation consciousness and become karmicly effective. The thought
process is not expected to cease, as in any case it is the natural, pure radi-
ance of emptiness. But the product of attachment--that is, karma-must
be prevented to achieve freedom from the process. Working with the
mind in this way, cutting through the very creation process of our self-
imposed cyclic existence, is fundamentally the same as the practices of
working with the afflictive emotions described earlier in the text.
Various experiences arise as this method becomes effective, but the
meditator is warned not to fixate on them, for they too are unreal, passing
away like everything else. The one single tool that is stressed continuously
to get through all manner of mental events, obstacles, distractions, and
even positive meditative experiences is called mindfulness, 92 the ability to
focus and know what is happening. Various ways of applying this mindful-
ness to different situations form most of the last part of this text.



Creation du Completion
Mindfulness develops initially in the meditation of calm abiding, which is
held as the preparatory foundation for many practices that aim at direct
realization of the mind's nature, such as the mahamudra and completion-
stage practice in its broadest sense. Only mindfulness sees one through the
whole way and is the final technique. Then “ultimately, even mindfulness
itself does not exist."
The exceptional esoteric instructions of great perfection (dzogchen)* are
mentioned as an approach of total noncontrivance, requiring only naked
awareness itself. Even the foundation of calm abiding is unnecessary.
Kongtrul mentions this exceptional approach several times, as it is subtly, but
profoundly, different. However, each mention comes with a note of warning,
not in the sense of any doubt as to the edifying nature of the instructions, but
to caution against the grave possibility of misconstruing these very fine
points. Kongtrul caims it would be "better to tread the gradual path."
Completion-stage meditation, the simple state of resting in intrinsic
awareness, is rife with pitfalls and challenges. Methods for identifying and
processing all of the experiences that could arise in this stage constitute the
bulk of the literature on the subject. Otherwise, there is nothing to say.
One last clarification about the term itself: completion stage actually has
two applications, and this could cause some confusion. In the context of
this present teaching, it is the second of the two stages of deiry practice,
and usually corresponds to the actual dissolution of the visualization, where
mind rests without contrivance in its own nature. Since this is ideally the
ultimate realization, the term may take on a very expansive meaning.
The other use of the term is in describing a different series of medication
practices, more commonly known as yogas (mal 'yor), that involve work-
ing with the channels, chakras, seminal drops, and viral winds in the
psychophysical body. This includes such well-known practices as mystic
heat (grum mo), ejection of consciousness ('pho ba), and dream yoga (mmi
lam), as well as techniques practiced with a partner to develop and deploy
sexual energy (phyag rga). These are all called completion-stage practices.
Some of these practices are mentioned briefly toward the end of the text.
Since they involve a considerable amount of technique, including extensive
visualization, it is not immediately apparent where the connection is with
the formless, uncontrived apprehension of the natural state that is also
called the completion stage in deity practice. They are, however, related.



Introduction
According to the teachings of Vajrayana, there is an intimate relation-
ship between the mind and the movement of vital energy or "wind" in the
body. It is said that the mind rides the wind, or that mind and wind are
inseparable. This can be noticed when calm abiding is stabilized. When the
ultimate realization of true nature takes place, what happens on the
psychophysical level is that the wind enters the central channel (dbu ma,
Skt, avadhuti), the main artery of movement of energy in the body. On the
other hand, a practitioner may choose to work at it from the other side,
that is, to cultivate these energies intentionally and cause the wind to enter
the central channel through various physical techniques, spontaneously
bringing about realization.
The first approach is termed the path of liberation ('rol lam) and the
second the path of method (thabs lam). The first is the direct approach of
recognizing mind nature, already described in the previous discussion of
completion stage. Although it may seem more direct and, to some people,
more attractive, it is evasive and difficult. It is one of the skillful methods
of tantra to work first with the physical energies of the body, for there the
mind will follow. The well-known yogi Milarepa" was an example of a
practitioner of this path. But generally one practices both, often in con-
junction, and, since the goal is the same, they are mutually supportive.
This is the relationship between the two uses of the term, and one need
only be informed of which method, form or formless, is under discussion.
The relationship between the terms is explained in the following quotation
from Gyurme Tsewang Chogdrup:
...to meditate (visualize and perceive) all the appearances with-
our differentiation as the Buddha-bodies of the deities, (in form
or structure) similar to the phenomena of the three existents
(worlds), combined with great compassion and contemplation of
the bliss of melting, which causes the three Buddha-bodies to
mature (within oneself) is the essence (Ngo-bo) of the develop-
ment stage... To merge the energy/air, mind and thoughts
(rLung Sems Yid) into the central channel and to actualize the
blissful and empty primordial wisdom directly is the essence of
the completion stage... The stage of the training (yoga) on chan-
nels, energies, and subtle essence and the stage of training in



Creation
Completion
using) consorts (S. mudra) which cause the energies to enter, be
maintained and dissolve into the central channel is not the actu-
al completion stage, but since it causes one to achieve it, it is
(also) called the completion stage.
In addition to some of the completion-stage yogas, the text concludes
with advice on other daily practices and techniques that enhance realiza-
tion in spiritual life. Tantric practice is not an isolated technique used only
for achieving altered states. These practices form a part of an entire lifestyle
with a fully intact ethical basis that is assimilated into every aspect of daily
living. This is the case with all Buddhist practice, and all the more so in
Vajrayana, which seeks to radically alter our mode of perception to redis-
cover ourselves. Every moment must be steeped in awareness, and any
method that enhances that must be employed. One must never lose sight
of remembering impermanence, cultivating love and compassion and
devotion, and acting with integrity and an awareness of karmic cause and
effect. Creation-stage and completion-stage practices are set within this
context of a wholly spiritual and awakened life. So it is said:
Therefore the view is higher than the sky;
karmic cause and effect is finer than flour."
Jamgön Kongtrulse
Jamgön Yönten Gyamtso Lodrö Thayek! was one of the spiritual and liter-
ary giants of nineteenth-century Tibet. The scope of his accomplishment is
enormous, and his tremendous influence in the religious development of
the Himalayan region cannot be underestimated. He is renowned for his
crucial role in the nonsectarian (ris med) movement of Eastern Tibet
(Kham) that was revitalizing the religious life of the time. This cultural
renaissance was an exciting period of spiritual and intellectual evolution
that gave rise to a great many exceptional religious figures: Jamyang
Khyentse Wangpo (1820–92), Mipam Gyamtso (1846-1912), and Chok-
gyur Dechen Lingpa ("Chokling 1829–70), to name a few. Even among
these great masters, Kongtrul's name looms large.
10



Introduction
Kongtrul was largely successful in his lifetime in accomplishing the
three main goals that characterized this eclectic nonsectarian movement: to
preserve the various practice lineages that were verging on extinction, to
discourage the narrow-minded sectarian bigotry that had plagued Tibet for
centuries, and to re-integrate religious study and practice in a meaningful
way in the lives of its practitioners. The acute necessity for these changes
came as the result of the long history in Tibet of power politics invading
the realm of religion and the resulting degeneration in authentic spiritual
practice. Fortunately, the pure lineage of practice was never lost entirely,
and throughout the history of the region there have continued to be great
masters who have risen above sectarianism through the power of the true
teachings. Jamgön Kongtrul is certainly such a one, and perhaps his own
personal experiences with the unsavory side of religious politics and petti-
ness contributed to his greatness.
Kongtrul was born in December of 1813 in Rongyab in Kham, Eastern
Tibet. He was raised by his mother, Tashi Tso, and her husband Sonam
Pel, who was a village lama of the pre-Buddhist Bön religion. Kongtrul was
thoroughly trained by Sonam Pel as a Bön priest, and quickly mastered
that tradition. He described himself later as gentle and shy, but with an
early spiritual propensity.
Around the age of fourteen, his life and training were abruptly interrupt-
ed. Due to a local feud, authorities from Derge, the capital of the area, cap-
tured Sonam Pel and took him off to prison, where Kongtrul followed in
order to help sustain him. There he made connections with some teachers of
the Nyingma school, who were greatly impressed with his knowledge of Bön.
This led to his acceptance into the Nyingma monastery of Shechen, which
he entered in 1829 and received ful monastic vows in 1832. The monastic
institutions of Tibet were bastions of power and intrigue, and an established
monastery with good connections could wield a great deal of power. Though
Kongtrul was apparently quite happy with his studies at the Nyingma
monastery, his exceptional talents caused him to be requisitioned as a
secretary for a high lama of Palpung, a powerful Kagyu monastery. He
moved there in 1833 and was advised to retake his monastic ordination under
the principal head of that monastery, Situ Pema Nyinche.63 Presumably the
ordination he had received just one year earlier didn't "count" because it was
from a different order. His objections were overruled and the vows retaken.



Creation
Completion
This occasion may have marked Kongtrul's first disillusionment with the
petry sectarianism of the monastic world, but a further political maneuver
was to follow. The Palpung lamas were concerned lest his outstanding quali-
ties attract the attention of the Derge government, which could requisition
him for its own purposes. So they devised a plan to install him as an incarna-
tions of a previous Palpung personage, which would assure his permanent
position there. They chose the late servant of the previous Situ incarnation, a
position not too high but still an incarnate lama, which would serve their
purpose adequately. He was "recognized" as such and received the name
“Kongtrul."66
Despite this background of political intrigue, Kongtrul sincerely regard-
ed Situ Pema Nyinche as his primary guru“ and Palpung Monastery as his
seat. He continued his studies under this great lama, and came to consider
himself as a holder of the Kagyu lineage. His primary interest had always
been in actual meditation practice, so in 1842 he left the main monastery
to take up residence in an old, abandoned retreat center nearby, which
turned out to be near a sacred power site, known as Tsandra Rinchen Trak.
This he eventually (1860) transformed into a three-year retreat center and
designed a curriculum that is still the model for similar retreats today,
Before this, however, he had come to feel regret with what he consid-
ered a lapse in his connection with the Nyingma lineage, and he attrib-
uted this as the cause for later ill health and various mental and karmic
obstacles. Gradually he worked through these problems, largely with the
help of the great Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo and Chokling Rinpoche.
The two of them recognized him as a revealer of hidden treasures
(terton), and bestowed on him the name Tennyi Yungdrung Lingpa.
During the latter part of his life, he fulfilled this role, bringing forth many
new hidden treasures, often in conjunction with Khyentse. The relation-
ship between Kongtrul and Khyentse, the two “Jamgön Lamas," was very
profound and mutually inspiring, and it is often difficult to tell who was
the guru and who the disciple. They became powerful forces in the entire
region, and were able to pacify some of the conflicts that arose due to sec-
tarian competition
Kongtrul developed a profound faith in all aspects and lineages of the
Buddha's teaching. All manifestations of the Dharma are for the benefit of
beings, and rejecting any aspect of them basically amounts to rejecting the



Introduction
Buddha's doctrine. The symptoms of the inner conflict caused by the sec-
tarian and political problems seem to have been resolved by the time
Kongtrul was forty years old, when he went on to establish the retreat cen-
ter and continue his prolific writings. The program of the retreat included
meditations from all of the practice lineages, some of which were disappear-
ing within the overbearing monastic institutions of the four main schools.
Thus through his teaching and writing, he preserved the rich variety of
precious instructions of all lineages and fostered a sense of appreciation and
mutual respect. The nonsectarian movement flourished in large part due to
his contributions. It is still a powerful influence that all of the great lamas
since Kongtrul have supported. The power of Kongtrul's influence will
hopefully prevail in the West, where hints of ignorant sectarianism some-
times creep in.
Kongtrul continued his activities until the time of his death in 1899 at
the age of eighty-seven. The enormity of Kongtrul's contribution was
expressed by the late Dudjom Rinpoche as follows:
So if we examine Jamgön Kongtrül's career, which produced
over ninety volumes of wonderful scripture, it is as if he spent
his whole life as an author.
None the less, if one thinks of his teaching and propagation
of the empowerments, guidance, esoteric instructions, recitational
transmissions, and so forth, of the ancient and new sūtras and
tantras, and transmitted precepts and treasures, without bias, it
is as if he spent his whole life teaching and propagating. And, if
one investigates how, beginning with the preliminary yogas of
accumulation and purification, he experientially cultivated the
stages of creation and perfection associated with inconceivable
myriads of mandalas, it seems as if he passed the length of his life
in a retreat house sealed up with mud.
Likewise, if one considers how Jamgön Kongtrül expanded
the new monastic communities at the places of attainment in
Tsandra Rincen Trak and Dzongshö Deshek Dupa, and how he
renovated many old establishments, commissioned inconceivable
numbers of new representations of the buddha-body, speech, and
mind, performed more than one hundred and fifty rites of great



Creation
Completion
attainment involving mandala clusters, offered worship to the
Three Precious Jewels, and venerated the monastic community
in short, his legacy in connection with the ten modes of doctri-
nal conduct—it is as if he passed his whole life diligently
engaged in the sphere of work and activity. In these ways [his
career) was inconceivable, within only the reach of those who
are truly sublime.
Literary Works
The collected literary works (gsung 'bum) of Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö
Thaye take up ninety volumes in the complete Palpung edition. Tradi-
tionally they are divided into five collections, called the Five Great Treasuries
(mdzod chen Inga) listed below, and they fulfill the early prediction of
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo that Kongtrul would produce five such trea-
sures. Most of them were collected during the time of Kongtrul's administra-
tion of the retreat center near Palpung, and many works were composed for
the specific study program there. Together the five Great Treasuries' repre-
sent the entire range of Buddhist philosophy and practice of all the sects.
Their very composition and arrangement is a testimony to Kongtrul's non-
sectarian approach. His intention in bringing together this vast collection was
to reveal the essential similarities of the various approaches as well as to pre-
serve them.
1. The Encompassment of All Knowledge (shes bya kun khyab) or Treasury of
Knowledge shes bya mdzod) in three volumes covers the full range of
Indo-Tibetan knowledge, from the formation of the universe up to the
history of Buddhist lineages and practices in Tibet. It includes the com-
mon sciences and all the philosophical viewpoints as well as religious
history. This masterpiece in itself would have been a stupendous
accomplishment for one person's life.
2. The Treasury of Kagyu Mantra (bka' brgyud sngags mdzod) in four or six
volumes is a collection of esoteric teachings and practices from two
transmissions of the Kagyu-Marpa and Ngog-as well as some from
the Nyingma.



Introduction
3. The Treasury of Precious Treasure (rin chen gter mdzod) in sixty or
sixty-three volumes is not just a reproduction of the older cycles of
treasure texts that are still extant, as is sometimes thought, but contains
smaller basic texts, supplementary works, new liturgical texts, and
introductory instructions for other treasures, all pertaining to the
Nyingma."
4. The Treasury of Instructions (gdams ngag mdzod) in ten volumes is a sys-
tematic presentation of the most important instructions of all the differ-
ent lineages, especially of the Eight Great Chariots of Practice.
5. The Extraordinary Treasury (thun mong ma yin pai mdzod) and its auxil-
iary The Treasury of Vasi Precepts (rgya chen bka' mdzod), comprising ten
volumes, contains Kongtrul's own revealed treasures as well as many other
writings that don't belong in any of the other Treasuries.
The text translated here is a tiny drop in this vast, deep ocean.



Creation & Completion:
The Root Text in Tibetan and English
YA
way from home
OS
NOTE ON TEXT
In preparing this volume of the Tibecan text, the publisher has checked
it against the Tsibri Parma edition, published by Ladakh Tripon
Trulshik Pema Chogyal (1876–1958). Obvious misprints have been cor-
recced, and variant readings from the Tsibri print have been added in
small gray script. In most cases the readings from Khenpo Tsultrim
Gyamtso's manuscript are preferable.



༄༅།། ལམ་ཞུགས་ཀྱི་གང་ཟག་ལས་དང་པོ་པ་ལ་ཕན་པའི་
བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་གནད་བསྡུས་བཞུགས་སོ།། །།
༄༅།། །རྟག་བརྟན་ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ་ཟག་མེད་ཀྱི། །བདེ་སྟོང་ཏིང་འཛིན་སྒོ་
བརྒྱ་སྤྲོ་བསྡུ་ལ། །རྣམ་པར་རོལ་པ་མཚོ་སྐྱེས་རྡོ་རྗེ་དང་། །དབྱེར་མེད་པདྨ་ཉིན་
བྱེད་དབང་པོར་འདུད། །སྙིགས་མའི་རང་མདངས་མངོན་པར་ཤར་བའི་སྐབས། །
ཐ་མལ་རྨོངས་པ་བདག་འདྲས་ཟབ་རྒྱས་དོན། །བཤད་པས་ཅི་བྱ་རང་ཉིད་ངལ་
བའི་རྒྱུ། །འོན་ཀྱང་རྡོ་རྗེ་མཆེད་པོས་བཀའ་གནང་དང་། །རང་འདྲའི་རྨོངས་པ་
འགའ་ལའང་ཕན་པའི་གཏམ། །དཔལ་ལྡན་བླ་མའི་བྱིན་རླབས་ཁོ་ན་ལ། །བརྟེན་
ནས་གང་ཤར་བཀག་མེད་ལྷུག་པར་སྨྲ། ༈ །རྙེད་དཀའི་དལ་འབྱོར་རིན་ཆེན་ད་
རེས་ཐོབ། །ཐ་མལ་སྐྱེ་བོ་མ་ལུས་ཆོས་དང་མཇལ། །སངས་རྒྱས་དངོས་སྣང་བླ་
མས་རྗེས་སུ་བཟུངས་། །ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཡང་སྙིང་གང་ཟབ་བལྟ་བ་དང་། བླ་མའི་ཁྲོད་
ནས་སུ་བཟང་འདོམ་འདེམ་པས་ཆོག །རང་དབང་ཡོད་དུས་ཆོས་མཐུན་རྐྱེན་མ་
ལུས། །འཛོམས་པའི་དུས་འདིར་གཞན་དོན་མ་འགྲུབ་ཀྱང་། །རང་མགོ་ཐོན་ཙམ་
ཉམས་ལེན་མ་བྱས་ན། །ནམ་འཆི་ཆ་མེད་འཆི་ཚེ་ཆོས་མ་གཏོགས། །ཅིས་ཀྱང་
མི་ཕན་འཁོར་ལོས་སྒྱུར་རྒྱལ་གྱི། །དཔལ་འབྱོར་ཡོད་ཀྱང་མལ་གྱི་ཤུལ་དུ་ལུས། །



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion That
Will Benefit the Beginner Who Has Entered the Path
I bow to Pema Nyinje Wangpo”
inseparable from the Lake-born Vajra," who manifests
the infallible absorption of bliss-emptiness, steady and everlasting,
emanating and resolving in a hundred ways.
In the face of these disturbing times,
an ordinary stupid person like myself becomes exhausted
trying to explain the deep and vast meaning!
Nevertheless, my vajra friend has implored me,
and maybe it would help a few fools like me.
So I rely only on the blessings of the glorious guru
and speak freely without reservation.
You now have the precious opportunity of human life, so difficult to find;
not just as an ordinary person, but one who has encountered the Dharma
and been accepted by a teacher, the personal appearance of the Buddha,?
you can seek the most profound quintessence of Dharma
and choose the finest from among the gurus.
While you have this chance, and all conditions conducive to Dharma
have accrued, even if you do not achieve others' welfare,
at least practice for your own sake.
Otherwise, at the time of death, and that time is uncertain,
there is nothing whatsoever that can help other than Dharma.
Even the wealth of a universal monarch" just gets left behind on the
death bed.
Positive and negative actions adhere to the consciousness,
and not knowing what to do, even regret won't help.



Creation
Completion
རྣམ་ཤེས་དགར ་ནག་ལས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་། །ཅི་བྱས་གཏོལ་མེད་འགྱོད་ཀྱང་མི་
ཕན་པས། །ད་ལྟ་ཉིད་ནས་ཕྱིག་ཤོལ་མེད་པ་རུ། །སྒོ་གསུམ་དགེ་བའི་ལས་ལ་
འབདཔར་ཚལ། །ཉམས་ལེན་རྨང་རྡོ་ངེས་འབྱུང་ཁོ་ན་ཡིན། །ཉམས་ལེན་
འཇུག་སྒོ་དད་པ་ཁོ་ན ཡིན། །ཉམས་ལེན་གཞུང་ལམ་སྙིང་རྗེ་ཁོ་ན་ཡིན། །ཉམས་
ལེན་སྲོག་ཤིང་རྩེ་གཅིག་སྒྲུབ་ཚུགས་ཡིན། །ཉམས་ལེན་འབྲལ་མེད་བག་ཡོད་དྲན་
ཤེས་ཡིན། །ཉམས་ལེན་གེགས་སེལ་དཀོན་མཆོག་བློ་གཏད་ཡིན། །ཉམས་ལེན་
བོགས་འདོན་བླ་མར་མོས་གས་ཡིན། །ཉམས་ལེན་འཁྲུལ་མེད་བླ་མའི་གདམས་
ངག་ཡིན། །ཉམས་ལེན་གནད་འདུས་རྩ་གསུམ་གཅིག་དྲིལ་བ། །ཞི་དང་ཁྲོ་བོའི་
དཀྱིལ་འཁོར་མ་ལུས་པར། །བླ་མའི་རོལ་པར་ཤར་ན་གཅིག་ཆོག་ཡིན། །དབང་
པོ་ཡང་རབ་སྦྱངས་པ་སྔོན་སོང་དང་། །མོས་གུས་ཚད་དུ་ཕྱིན་དང་སྐྱེས་ཆེན་
མཆོག། །དེ་དག་རྣམས་ནི་རིམ་རྩོལ་མ་བྱས་ཀྱང་། །ཆོས་ཉིད་བདེན་པ་གཟིགས་
པ་འཐད་རུང་བྱུང་ཡིན། །དེ་ལས་གཞན་ཀུན་འཕགས་པ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱིས། །ཇི་སྐད་སྙེད་
གསུངས་བཞིན་ཐོས་པས་བསམ་བྱུང་བསྐྱེད། །བསམ་པས་སྒོམ་ཉམས་བསྐྱེད་དེ་
གོ་རིམ་བཞིན། །རྣམ་གཡེང་སྤངས་ཏེ་རྟག་ཏུ་བརྩོན་བྱས་ན། །དང་པོ་ཐོས་པ་ལས་
བྱུང་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱིས། །འཁོར་འདས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་སྤྱི་ཙམ་རྟོགས། །བསམ་
པས་འཁྲུལ་སྣང་བདེན་འཛིན་རགས་པ་ཞི། །སྒོམ་པས་སེམས་ཐོག་ཁོ་ཐག་ཆོད་པ་
སོགས། །སྔམ་སྔ་མས་རྒྱུ་བྱས་ཕྱི་མ་བསྐྱེད། །དེ་དག་མི་ལྡན་རྒྱུ་མེད་འབྲས་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
From this very moment on, without delay,
you must strive to practice virtue with body, speech, and mind.
The only foundation stone of practice is renunciation.
The only gateway of practice is faith.
The only approach to practice is compassion.
The life-tree of practice is single-minded application.
Constant practice is conscientious mindfulness.
The removal of obstacles to practice is to rely on the Three Jewels.??
The enhancement of practice is devotion to the guru.
Unmistakable practice is the guru's instruction.
The one essential point of practice is that the Three Roots combined
and all of the peaceful and wrathful mandalas
arise as the guru's display—this one thing is sufficient.
The most gifted individuals are those who have developed in previous lives,
have already reached the full capacity of devotion, and are born as great,
superior beings.
For them, even without following the stages of practice,
it is still possible to perceive the truth of reality. 90
For all others, it is as the noble Nagarjuna said:
Listening to Dharma engenders contemplation,
and contemplation gives rise to the meditation experience this is the
sequence.
So if you abandon distraction and continuously apply effort,
first the intelligence that comes from listening
will result in comprehension of the general characteristics of the
phenomena of cyclic existence and its transcendence.
Then, contemplation will pacify blatant grasping to the reality of illusory
appearances,
meditation develops the definitive direct experience of mind, and so on.
Thus the previous stages act as causes for the arising of the latter.
When this is not the case, it is like desiring results without any cause.
You may claim that your accumulation, purification, and
practice are most excellent,
bemoaning the hardships of a practice that is merely conjectural.



Creation
Completion
འདོད་ལྟར། །བསགས་སྦྱངས་སྒྲུབ་ཚུགས་ཤིན་ཏུ་བཟང་ངོ་ལོ། །ངེས་ཤེས་མེད་
པའི་ཉམས་ལེན་སྡུག་ཡུས་ཆེ། །དེ་འདྲས་ཉམས་མྱོང་བློ་ཐག་ཆོད་མི་འགྱུར། །
ཐག་མ་ཆོད་པས་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ངང་དུ་ལུས། །ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཁོ་ན་མཆོག་གི་བར་ཆད་ཡིན། །
ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ་པས་བློ་ཐག་ཆོད་པའི་ཚེ། །ཁྱོད་ཀྱི་བསྒོམ་འདིས་དམྱལ་བར་
འགྲོ་ཟེར་ཡང་། །ཡ་ང་ལ་འཕྲུག་འཁྲིག་མི་སྐྱེ་ཐག་ཆོད་ལགས། །རྒྱལ་བས་
གསུངས་པའི་ཆོས་ཚུལ་མཐའ་དག་གི །གནད་དོན་བསྡུ་ན་རང་སེམས་འདུལ་
ཐབས་ལགས། །སེམས་ཀྱི་ཉམས་ལེན་དང་པོའི་འཇུག་སྒོ་ནི། །ངེས་འབྱུང་ཁོ་ན་
མེད་ཐབས་མེད་པ་ལགས། །ངེས་འབྱུང་གཤའ་མ་སྐྱེས་ན་བྱ་བྱེད་ཉུང་། །བྱ་བྱེད་
ཉུང་ན་བྱར་མེད་དོན་དང་ཉེ། །བྱར་མེད་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་ཚེ་གནས་ལུགས་ཡིན། །དེ་
ལས་གཞན་དུ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཡོད་མི་སྲིད། །ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབྱེ་བ་གྲངས་མང་
ཡང་། །རང་གི་སེམས་ཀྱི་སྟེང་དུ་ཚུར་བསྡུ་ན། །གནས་ལུགས་གཞི་རྩ་ཆོད་པ་ལྟ་
བ་ཡིན། །དེ་དོན་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ་སྒོམ་པ་ཡིན། །གང་ཤར་ལྟ་སྒོམ་རྩིས་ཟིན་སྤྱོད་
པ་ཡིན། །ཡིན་ལུགས་མངོན་དུ་གྱུར་པ་འབྲས་བུར་འདོད། །འཁྲུལ་པའི་རྩ་བ་ཕྱི་
རོལ་སྣང་བ་ལ། །རང་གི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་བདེན་པར་འཛིན་པ་ཡིན། །བསྐྱེད་རིམ་
རྫོགས་རིམ་ཅི་དང་ཅིར་བསྒོམ་ཡང་། །འཁྲུལ་སྣང་བདེན་ཞེན་ཟློག་ཐབས་ཁོ་ན་
སྟེ། །ཆགས་སྡང་ཨ་འཐས་བག་ཆགས་མ་ཟློག་ན། །བསྒོམ་པ་དོན་མེད་ཕྱི་བ་
ཁུང་ཉལ་འདྲ། །བཅོས་མ་ཀུན་བརྟགས་རྒྱ་ཆེ་བསྐྱེད་པའི་རིམ། །རྣལ་མ་ཡོངས་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
This kind of experience will not lead to conviction.
Without conviction, you are stranded in doubt,
and doubt is the only supreme obstacle.
When conviction arises through listening, contemplating, and meditating,
even if someone says "this meditation will send you to hell,"
rather than being frightened, you will be supremely confident.
The essential point of all the modes of Dharma taught by the Buddha
can be epitomized as a method to subdue one's mind.
The entryway into the initial mind practice
is surely renunciation, without which there is no way.
If authentic renunciation arises, compulsive activities will be few;
if activities are few, the significance of non-action will be near.
When non-action is realized, it is the true nature."
There is no other buddha outside of that.
There are many categories of view, meditation, and action,
but when applied to one's own mind,
the view is absolute conviction in the true nature;
meditation is assimilating that meaning in one's being
and action is recognizing anything that happens as that view and meditation.
It follows that the fruition will be the actualization of things as they are.
The root of delusion is one's own mind grasping
external appearances as being truly existent.
Whatever creation or completion stage meditations are employed,
all are intended as methods to reverse this attachment to the reality of
deluded appearance.
If stubborn habits of attachment and aversion are not reversed,
then meditation is as meaningless as a gopher hibernating in a hole.
Creation stage is the vast imaginary nature of contrivance
and completion stage is the profound perfectly existent nature of genuine
condition.es
These are the names and definitions that have been caught.
They are also described as with and without elaboration, respectively.



Creation
Completion
གྲུབ་ཟབ་པ་རྫོགས་རིམ་གྱི། །མིང་གི་རྣམ་གྲངས་སོ་སོའི་ངེས་ཚིག་སྟོན། །སྤྲོས་
བཅས་སྤྲོས་མེད་ཉིད་ཀྱང་དེ་བཞིན་ནོ། །གང་ཟག་བློ་རིམ་མཆོག་དམན་ལ་
དགོངས་ནས། །བསླུ་མེད་རྒྱལ་བའི་དགོངས་པ་ཁོ་ནའི་ཕྱིར། །བཟང་ངན་དབྱེ་རྒྱུ་
མེད་ཀྱང་རང་རང་གི །བློ་དང་བསྟུན་ནས་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་པ་གནད། །ཐབས་མང་
དཀའ་བ་མེད་པ་སྔགས་ལམ་ནས། །དབང་རྣོན་ཤེས་རབ་ཆེ་བའི་གང་ཟག་གིས། །
བྱེད་སྤྱོད་ཐམས་ཅད་ཚོགས་གཉིས་ཁོ་ན་ལས། །དོན་མེད་གྱུར་བ་སྤུ་ཙམ་མེད་ན་
ཡང་། རྨོངས་པ་ལོག་ལྟ་ཅན་གྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་མིན། །ཅིར་ཡང་སྣང་བདེན་ཞེན་ཆུང་
ཞིང་ཐབས་ལམ་ལ། དད་པ་མོས་གུས་ཡིད་ཆེས་གཏིང་ཚུགས་སྟེ། །འདུན་པ་
བསྒྱུར་བའི་གནད་ཀྱིས་འཛིན་མཁས་ན། མཆོག་ཐུན་དངོས་གྲུབ་བོས་པའི་མགྲོན་
ལས་མྱུར། ༈ །ཆོས་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་བདེན་པ་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས། །དེ་ཡང་
ཀུན་རྫོབ་བདེན་པ་འཁྲུལ་ངོར་བདེན། །དོན་དམ་བདེན་པ་གཤིས་ངོར་བདེན་པ་
ཡིན། བདེན་པའི་གཏན་ཚིགས་བསླུ་བ་མེད་ལ་བརྗོད། །བདེན་གཉིས་དབྱེར་མེད་
ཆུ་ཟླ་ལྟར་ཤེས་ན། །དེ་ལ་འཁྲུལ་པའི་སྣང་བ་ཟད་ལ་ཉེ། ༈ །དྲང་ངེས་ལམ་
གྱིས་སངསརྒྱས་བསྒྲུབ་པ་ལ། །བསླུ་བ་མེད་ཀྱང་ལམ་ཐག་ཉེ་རིང་ཡོད། །དཔེར་
ན་བགྲོད་བྱ་ལྷ་སའི་གནས་གཅིག་ལ། །རྐང་པས་ཕྱིན་དང་མཁའ་ལ་འཕུར་བ་
འདྲ། །ཉེ་ལམ་ཡིན་ཀྱང་གང་ཟག་བློ་ཞེན་ན། །ཟབ་ཁྱད་ཆོས་མི་ཐོན་ཐ་མལ་ངང་དུ་
ལུས། །འོག་མ་ཁྱད་བསད་གོང་མ་མི་ཟིན་པར། །སྟོང་སྐད་འདོན་ནས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
Since they are both exclusively the infallible intention of the victorious ones
who recognize the different capacities of individuals,
there is no question of division into good and bad.
The point is to do practice appropriate to one's own intellect.
In the mantra approach, with its many methods and few austerities,
a person of sharp faculties and high intelligence
may gather the two accumulations during all activities
and never do even a trace of anything meaningless.
This is not, however, the sphere of activity for a fool with
mistaken views.
With little attachment to the reality of whatever arises,
deeply rooted devotion and belief in the path of methods,
and tenacity in pursuing the significance of the goal,
ordinary and supreme mastery will come quicker than a
summoned guest!
All phenomena are subsumed under the two cruths:
the relative truth is true with respect to delusion,
and the absolute truth is true with respect to true nature.
The definition of truth" is that it is without deception.
If you know that the two truths are inseparable, like the moon in water,
then the extinction of deluded appearance is close at hand.
There is no doubt that both the provisional and definitive paths) lead to
buddhahood,
but there are shorter and longer paths.
For instance, the destination may be a single place, such as Lhasa,
but you could either go on foot or by flying through the air.
Even on the short path, a person with meager intelligence
will not discover the distinctive wisdom, but will be left among the ordinary.
Disdaining the lower and unable to grasp the higher,
talking of emptiness, such a person will neglect cause and effect,
mouthing on about the view while in a state of self-deception.
It would be better to concentrate on the gradual path.



Creation or Completion
ཁྱད་བསད་དེ། །ལྟ་བ་ཁ་ཁྱེར་ཕྱིར་རང་གིས་རང་ཉིད་བསླུ། །དེ་འདྲས་རིམ་བགྲོད་
ལམ་ལ་འབད་ན་ལེགས། ༈ །འཇུག་པའི་ལམ་ཡང་མདོ་ལམ་དང་སྔགས་ལམ་
གཉིས། །ཞུགས་པའི་ཐབས་ལ་རྒྱ་ཆེ་གྲངས་མང་ཡང་། །སྡིག་པ་ཅི་ཡང་མི་བྱ་
དགེ་བ་སྤྱད། །རང་སེམས་འདུལ་ལ་མདོ་ཡི་ཉམས་ལེན་འདུས། །བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་
རིམ་གཉིས་བསྒོམ་པ་སྔགས་ལུགས་ཀྱི། །ཉམས་ལེན་འདུས་ཞེས་ཐམས་ཅད་
མཁྱེན་པས་གསུངས། །དེ་ཡང་ཆོས་ཀུན་རྩ་བ་སེམས་ཡིན་པས། །ཐོག་མ་ཉིད་དུ་
རང་སེམས་འདུལ་བ་གནད། །སེམས་མ་ཐུལ་བའི་བསྙེན་སྒྲུབ་རྟེན་བཞེངས་
སོགས། །ཚེ་རབས་བསགས་ཀྱང་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐོབ་མི་འགྱུར། །སེམས་དུལ་ཞེས་པ་
ཉོན་མོངས་འདུལ་བ་ཡིན། །ཉོན་མོངས་འདུལ་ཐབས་སྤྱང་བསྒྱུར་ཤེས་གསུམ་
འདུས། །ཉོན་མོངས་སྤོང་བ་ཐུན་མོང་མདོ་ཡི་ལམ། །འདོད་ཆགས་མི་སྡུག་ཞེ་
སྡང་བྱམས་པ་དང་། །གཏི་མུག་གཉེན་པོར་རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བསྒོམས་པས་སྤངས། །
ཉོན་མོངས་བསྒྱུར་བ་ཐུན་མིན་གསང་སྔགས་ལམ། །འདོད་ཆགས་སྐྱེས་ཚེ་འོད་
དཔག་མེད་པའམ། །ཞལ་སྦྱོར་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ་ཡི་ལྷ་ཞིག་བསྒོམ། །འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པ་
ཡི་དམ་ལྷ་རུ་བསྒྱུར། །ཉོན་མོངས་གཞན་ལའང་དེ་ཡིས་འགྲེ་བར་བྱ། ༈ །ཉོན་
མོངས་རང་བཞིན་ཤེས་པ་ཁྱད་པར་ལམ། །འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པ་ལམ་ལམ་ཤར་
བའི་ཚེ། །ངོ་བོ་གཅེར་གྱིས་བལྟས་པས་རང་སར་ཡལ། །བདེ་སྟོང་དབྱེར་མེད་
ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་འཆར། །སོ་སོར་རྟོག་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཞེས་ཀྱང་བྱ། །གདོད་ནས་སྤྱང་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
In entering the path, there is both the sutra approach and the mantra
approach,
and there are a vast number of methods for following them.
The omniscient one taught chat to do no unvirtuous deeds whatsoever,
to practice virtue, and to control one's own mind summarizes sutra
practice,
and meditation on the two stages of creation and completion
summarizes mantra practice.
Since the mind is the root of all phenomena,
it is crucial to control it right from the start.
Doing recitation and visualization practices without mental control
could go on for lifetimes without resulting in enlightenment.
What is called "mental control" means controlling afflictive emotions.B!
Methods of controlling afflictive emotions can be subsumed into three:
rejection, transformation, and recognition.
Rejecting these emotions is the ordinary approach of the sutras.
Desire is renounced through contemplation on repulsiveness, hatred
through contemplation on love,
and stupidity through meditation on interdependent relationship."
The uncommon approach of mantra is to transform afflictive emotions.
When desire arises, you meditate on Amitabha"
or a deity such as Heruka” in union.
The desirous thought is transformed into the deity.
The other deluded emotions are treated in the same way.
The exceptional approach is to recognize the true nature of afflictive
emotions.
When desirous thoughts arise vividly,
looking directly at their essence, they subside in themselves.
This is the dawning of mahamudra, bliss and emptiness inseparable.
It is also called the pristine wisdom of discernment. **
There has never been anything to reject, nor to accept,
nor to transform; everything is contained within mind.
Know that there is no other intention of a buddha
than simply the uncontrived mind itself.



Creation & Completion
དུ་མེད་ཅིང་བླང་དུ་མེད། །བསྒྱུར་དུ་མེད་ཅིང་ཐམས་ཅད་སེམས་སུ་འདུས། །
སེམས་ཉིད་མ་བཅོས་བཞག་ན་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི། །དགོངས་པ་དེ་ལས་གཞན་མེད་
ཤེས་པའོ། ༈ །དེ་གསུམ་སྟན་ཐོག་གཅིག་ཏུ་ཉམས་བླངས་ཐབས། །རྒྱལ་བ་
ཡང་དགོན་པ་ཡི་བཞེད་པ་ནི། །དཔེར་ན་འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པ་སྐྱེས་པའི་ཚེ། །
སྐྱེས་མ་ཐག་ཏུ་དེང་ནས་བྱང་ཆུབ་པར། །བདག་གིས་གི་འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པ་རང་
རྒྱུད་པ། བྱེད་རེ་སྙམ་དུ་སྤྱང་སེམས་བརྟན་བསྟེན་པར་བྱ། །དེ་ནས་ནམ་མཁའ་ཁྱབ་
པའི་སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས། །འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོགས་པ་རང་རྒྱུད་པར་སར་གཡེང་བས། །
སྡུག་བསྔལ་མི་བཟད་མྱོང་བ་གང་ཡིན་དང་། །ཆོས་མཛད་བཤེས་གཉེན་རྣམས་ཀྱི་
ཐུགས་རྒྱུད་ལ། །འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པས་བར་ཆོད་ལ་སོགས་པ། །ཐམས་ཅད་
རང་གི་དེ་ལ་འུབ་ཀྱིས་བསྡུས། །འགྲོ་རྣམས་ཐམས་ཅད་འདོད་ཆགས་སེམས་
བྲལ་བསྒོམ། །བདག་གི་འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པ་འདིར་བརྟེན་ནས། །འགྲོ་རྣམས་རྡོ་
རྗེ་འཆང་གི་གོ་འཕང་ལ། འགོད་ཕྱིར་རིམ་གཉིས་སྒོམ་པར་བྱ་སྙམ་དུ། །སྐད་
ཅིག་བདེ་མཆོག་ལྟ་བུའི་ཧེ་རུ་ཀ །ཡབ་ཡུམ་ཞལ་སྦྱོར་རྒྱན་རྫོགས་གསལ་བར་
བསྒོམ། །དེ་ཡང་ཡབ་ལ་རིག་པ་ཧྲིལ་གྱིས་གཏད། །ཧ་ཅང་ཡུམ་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་
གསལ་དྲག་ན། །ད་དུང་འདོད་ཆགས་དུག་རོ་ལྡང་ཉེན་ཡོད། །དེས་ན་གནས་པ
སྐབས་ཐིག་ལེ་འཆོར་བ་དང་། །མཐར་ཐུག་རང་སེམས་འདོད་ཆགས་དབང་དུ་
ཤོར། །སྤྱིར་ཡང་ལྷ་སྐུ་བསྒོམས་བསྒོམ་ནས་ཉོན་མོངས་སོགས། །འཇིག་རྟེན་རྣམ་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
There is a method for practicing all three of these approaches in one sitting,
according to Gyalwa Yangön."
With thoughts of desire, for example,
as soon as they arise think: "From now on until enlightenment
I will do away with these ordinary thoughts of desire."
In this way establish an attitude of rejection.
Then imagine that whatever ordinary disturbing thoughts of desire
in the minds of all beings throughout space,
causing unbearable experiences of suffering,
as well as the thoughts of desire causing obstacles to
the minds of spiritual guides who are practicing Dharma,
are all gathered into your own desire,
and the minds of all beings become free of desire.
Then, thinking that by using these very thoughts of desire,
you will practice the two stages
in order to place all beings in the state of Vajradhara,
meditate that you instantly become a heruka such as Chakrasamvara,
masculine and feminine in union, with all the adornments.
When you identify your awareness with the masculine
and visualize the form of the feminine too intimately,
there is still the danger that the toxic effect of desire will resurface,
resulting initially in loss of vital energy" and
ultimately in coming under the power of desire.
In general, it is inappropriate to pursue mundane thoughts
and afflictive emotions while medicating on a deity.
Imagine that your root guru, magnificent and powerful,
is in your heart on a lotus and moon seat.
Pray sincerely again and again for the blessing that
the thoughts of desire that occur in your mind
arise as the pristine wisdom of discernment.
Then look directly at your own mind
as the inseparability of the deity, the guru, and the emotion,
The meditation should be maintained from the time
the emotion arises just until it is resolved.
Afterward, do a prayer to perfectly dedicate the merit, such as



Creation & Completion
རྟོག་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་མི་རུང་། དེ་ཡི་ཐུགས་ཀར་པད་ཟླའི་གདན་སྟེང་དུ། །རྩ་བའི་
བླ་མ་མཛེས་བརྗིད་ལྡན་པར་བསྒོམ། །བདག་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེས་འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པ་
འདི། །སོར་རྟོག་ཡེ་ཤེས་འཆར་བར་བྱིན་གྱིས་རློབས། །ཁ་ཞེ་མེད་པར་ཡང་ཡང་
གསོལ་བ་གདབ། །དེ་ནས་ལྷ་དང་བླ་མ་ཉོན་མོངས་གསུམ། །དབྱེར་མེད་རང་
སེམས་ཉིད་ལ་ཧྲིག་གེར་བལྟ། །བསྒོམ་ཡུན་རིང་ཐུང་ཉོན་མོངས་སྐྱེས་ནས་
བཟུང་། །ལམ་དུ་མ་སོང་ཚོད་ཙམ་སྐྱོང་ནས་མཐར། །དགེ་འདིས་འཁྲུལ་བའི་
སེམས་ཅན་མ་ལུས་དང་། །ཆོས་མཛད་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ས་ལམ་བར་ཆད་སོགས། །ཉོན་
མོངས་འདོད་ཆགས་རྟོག་པ་ཀུན་ཞི་ནས། །བདེ་སྟོང་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ཆེན་པོ་མངོན་གྱུར་
ཤོག། །ཅེས་པའི་བསྔོ་སྨོན་རྣམ་པར་དག་པ་བྱ། །ཞེ་སྡང་གཏི་མུག་ལ་ཡང་དེས་
དེའི་འགྲེ་ཞིང་། །ཞེ་སྡང་ཞི་བའི་ལྷ་བསྒོམ་ཁྱད་པར་གནད། ༈ །ཐ་མལ་འཁྲུལ་
སྣང་བཟློག་ལ་བསྐྱེད་རིམ་སྟེ། །དེ་ཉིད་བདེན་ཞེན་བཟློག་ལྡོག་ལ་རྫོགས་རིམ་
གཙོ། །ཚེ་གཅིག་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་དངོས་སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ། །བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཡ་བྲལ་སོང་བས་
དོན་མི་འགྲུབ། །བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་ཟུང་འཇུག་ཟབ་མོའི་ལམ་ཡིན་ཀྱང་། །རྣམ་རྟོག་
འགྱུ་བ་སྒོམ་དུ་མ་ཤར་བར། །ཟུང་འཇུག་དངོས་གཞི་མི་འོང་རེས་འཇོག་བྱ། །
བཅོས་པའི་ཟུང་འཇུག་བློས་བྱས་ཡིན་པས་སྤངས། ༈ །དེ་ཡང་བསྐྱེད་རིམ་སྒོམ་
བསྒོམ་པར་བྱེད་པ་ལ། །སྦྱང་གཞི་སྦྱང་བྱ་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་སྦྱངས་འབྲས་ཀྱི། །གོ་དོན་
ཕྱོགས་མགོ་ཙམ་ཞིག་ཆགས་པར་དགོས། །སྦྱང་གཞི་ཆོས་དབྱིངས་རྟག་བརྟན་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
"By this virtue may the thoughts of desire of
all deluded sentient beings
and obstacles to the stages and paths of Dharma practitioners be eliminated,
and the bliss-emptiness of mahamudra be actualized."
Apply this kind of meditation to hatred and stupidity as well.
For pacifying hatred, it is especially effective to meditate on a deity.
Creation stage is mainly for undermining the deluded appearance of
ordinary reality,
and completion stage for undermining attachment to the reality of that
creation stage itself.
The actualization of Vajradhara in a single lifetime
will not be achieved if creation and completion are separated.
Even though the unity of creation and completion is the profound
approach,
until the movement of thoughts arises as meditation,
it is not the real practice of unity, so you should alternate their practice.
Contrived unity is a mental fabrication and should be abandoned.
In the medication of creation stage, there are four aspects
of which you should gain at least some understanding:
the basis of purification, that which is to be purified, that which purifies,
and the result of purification,
The basis of purification is the eternal, noncomposite realm of reality:00
that fully permeates all beings as the buddha nature. 101
Sentient beings thus also possess the qualities of the body of reality, such
as the marks and signs,
that exist as an integral aspect of awareness: this is the basis for purification.
That which is to be purified is the incidental blemish of delusion
arising from ignorance without beginning, which obscures this buddha
nature.
An example would be the sun obscured by clouds.
The sunshine is the capacity to manifest inherent qualities.
The clouds are incidental blemishes that could clear away.
Emotional and cognitive obscurations and those of meditative absorption
are what is to be purified.



Creation & Completion
འདུས་མ་བྱས། །བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོས་འགྲོ་ཀུན་ཡོངས་ལ་ཁྱབ། །ཆོས་སྐུའི་
ཡོན་ཏན་མཚན་དཔེ་སོགས་ཀྱང་ལྡན། །ཡེ་ཤེས་རང་ཆས་བཞུགས་པ་སྦྱང་གཞི་
ཡིན། །སྦྱང་བྱ་ཐོག་མེད་དུས་ནས་མ་རིག་པས། །གློ་བུར་འཁྲུལ་པའི་དྲི་མས་
གཤེགས་སྙིང་བསྒྲིབས། །དཔེར་ན་ཉི་མ་སྤྲིན་གྱིས་བསྒྲིབས་པ་བཞིན། །ཡོན་ཏན་
རང་ཆས་མངོན་རུང་ཉི་ཟེར་འདྲ། །དྲི་མ་གློ་བུར་བསལ་རུང་སྤྲིན་དང་འདྲ། །
སྙོམས་འཇུག་ཉོན་སྒྲིབ་ཤེས་སྒྲིབ་སྦྱང་བྱ་ཡིན། །སྦྱོང་བྱེད་དབྱིབས་ཀྱི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་
གྲངས་མང་ཡང་། །མངལ་སྐྱེས་སྒོང་སྐྱེས་དྲོད་གཤེར་སྐྱེས་པ་གསུམ། །མངོན་
བྱང་ལྔ་བསྐྱེད་རྡོ་རྗེ་བཞི་བསྐྱེད་དང་། ཆོ་ག་གསུམ་གྱིས་བསྐྱེད་པ་སོགས་ཀྱིས་
སྦྱངས། །བརྫུས་སྐྱེས་སྐད་ཅིག་དྲན་རྫོགས་བསྐྱེད་པས་སྦྱངས། །མཁས་པས་སྦྱར་
བཤད་མི་མཐུན་གྲངས་མང་ཡང་། །མདོར་བསྡུས་གང་ཡང་འགལ་མེད་ཤེས་
པས་འཐུས། །དང་པོར་མངོན་རྟོགས་བསྒོམ་ནས་བསྡུ་རིམ་ཡན། །ཆོ་གའི་རིམ་པ་
སོ་སོར་ཡོད་པ་ཡང་། །སྦྱང་གཞི་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ་དེ་ཉིད་ལ། །སྦྱང་བྱ་བྱིས་
པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཞུགས་ནས་བཟུང་། །བཙས་ནས་འཆི་བའི་བར་གྱི་འཁྲུལ་པ་སྟེ། །
གསར་རྙིང་ཆོ་གའི་རིམ་པ་མི་འདྲ་ཡང་། །ཉོན་མོངས་འཁྲུལ་པའི་དྲི་མ་སྦྱངས་ལ་
གཅིག །དཔེར་ན་མིག་ནད་བཙག་བུ་ཐུར་མས་བཅོས། །ཁ་ནང་མཁུར་བཀང་ཚ་
གྲང་བསིལ་དྲོད་སོགས། །ནད་ལ་གཉེན་པོ་སོ་སོར་དགོས་པ་བཞིན། །སྦྱང་བྱའི་
གྲངས་ལྟར་སྦྱོང་བྱེད་དེ་མཚུངས་སྟེ། །མིག་ལ་ཐུར་མས་བཅོས་སམ་སྨན་གྱིས་



The Essential Poink of Creation and Completion
That which purifies are the many different form yogas, 103
such as the creation of the five actual enlightening factors, the four vajras,
and the three rituals,' which purify, respectively,
womb birth, egg birth, and moisture-warmth birth.
Miraculous birth is purified by the instantaneously complete creation.
Although scholars have applied many conflicting explanations,
we could summarize in the knowledge that there is nothing really
contradictory.
From the initial meditation on the deity visualization's up to the
dissolution,
each ritual has its own sequence, but to generalize:
the basis on which purification takes place is the buddha nature itself;
that which is purified is the delusion of the infant consciousness from the
time it enters and is born
through the time of the intermediate state of death.06
There are different ritual sequences in the old and new traditions, 107
but with respect to purifying the blemishes of deluded emotion they are
the same.
For instance, for disease of the eyes one primarily uses a scalpel,
or orally administers cooling or warming substances for imbalances in heat
or cold,
the particular remedy depending on the kind of discase.
There are as many methods of purification as there are problems to be
purified.
For the eyes, whether they are restored with instruments or heated with
medicine,
for relieving the pain and suffering, it is the same.
Similarly, there are various ritual sequences in the new and old traditions,
but insofar as they all purify the thoughts of afflictive emotions, there is
no difference.
Briefly, the way in which the rituals purify is as follows:
Meditation on the absorption of suchness purifies the previous death
experience.
All arising absorption purifies the mental body of the intermediate
existence.
Absorption of the cause, meditation on the lotus, sun and moon seat,



Creation
Completion
གསོས། །མིག་གི་ཟུག་རྔུ་སེལ་ལ་གཅིག་པ་བཞིན། །གསར་རྙིང་ཆོ་གའི་རིམ་པ་
ཐ་དད་ཀྱང་། །ཉོན་མོངས་རྟོག་ཚོགས་སྦྱངས་ལ་ཁྱད་པར་མེད། །དེ་ལ་ཆོ་གས་
སྦྱང་ཚུལ་མདོར་བསྡུས་ན། །དེ་ཏིང་བསྒོམས་པས་སྔར་གྱི་འཆི་སྲིད་སྦྱོང་། ཀུན་
ཏིང་བསྒོམས་པས་བར་སྲིད་ཡིད་ལུས་སྦྱོང་། །རྒྱུ་ཏིང་པད་ཉི་ཟླ་བའི་གདན་
བསྒོམས་པས། །ལུས་རྟེན་ཕ་མའི་ཁུ་ཁྲག་དཀར་དམར་སྦྱོང་། །ས་བོན་བསྒོམས་
པས་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཞུགས་པ་སྦྱོང་། །ཕྱག་མཚན་བསྒྱུར་དང་སླར་ཡང་ས་བོན་བསྒོམ།
།མེར་མེ་ལྟར་ལྟར་གོར་གོར་ལ་སོགས་སྦྱོང་། །སྐུ་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་པས་ལུས་གྲུབ་
བཙས་པ་སྦྱོང་། །གནས་གསུམ་བྱིན་རླབས་སྒོ་གསུམ་བག་ཆགས་སྦྱོང་། །མངོན་
བྱང་ལྔ་ཡིས་མངལ་སྐྱེས་སྦྱོང་ཚུལ་སྟེ། །གཞན་དག་ལ་ཡང་དེ་ཡིས་རིགས་འགྲེ་
བྱ། །གསང་སྔགས་བླ་མེད་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་འགའ་ཞིག་ནས། །རྒྱུ་ཡི་རྡོར་འཛིན་འཆི་སྲིད་
འོད་གསལ་དང་། །འབྲས་བུའི་རྡོར་འཛིན་བར་སྲིད་གྲུབ་པ་དང་། །མཁའ་གསང་
ནས་སྤྲོས་སྤྲོད་ཁུ་རྡུལ་རླུང་གསུམ་པོ། །འདྲེས་པའི་བག་ཆགས་ལུས་རྟེན་སྦྱོང་བ་
དང་། །འབྲུ་གསུམ་རིམ་ཡལ་སྣང་མཆེད་ཐོབ་གསུམ་སྦྱང་། །ཐིག་ལེས་སྣང་བ་
དཀར་དམར་སྦྱོང་བ་སོགས། །མང་ཡང་འདི་ཙམ་ཤེས་པས་དེ་དག་ཁྲོལ། །ཡེ་
ཤེས་བཅུག་པ་འཕྲུལ་སྤྱོད་བསླབ་པ་སྦྱོང་། །དབང་བསྐུར་རྒྱས་གདབ་ཕ་སྐལ་ཕོག་
པ་སྦྱོང་། །ཕྱག་བཤགས་མཆོད་བསྟོད་ཡུལ་ལ་ལོངས་སྤྱོད་སྦྱོང་། །འཛབ་བསྙེན་
བཟླས་པས་ངག་གི་ལོང་གཏམ་སྦྱོང་། བསྡུ་རིམ་སྐྱེ་བ་དེ་ཡི་འཆི་སྲིད་དང་། །ལྷ་



The Essential Poink of Creation and Completion
purifies the physical base, the parents' sperm and ovum, white and red.
Meditation on the seed syllable purifies the entering consciousness.
The transformation into implements and again the meditation on the seed
syllables
purifies the fetal stages of round, oval, oblong, and so on.
The fully complete form purifies the birth of the developed body.
The blessing of the three places purifies the habitual patterns of the body,
speech, and mind.
This manner of the five enlightening factors purifying womb birth
can be applied in a similar way to the others.
In some of the highest yogacantras of secret mantra,
the "cause vajra holder* corresponds to the clear light of the death
experience,
the result vajra holder"}\) to achieving the intermediate existence,
and the emanation from the organs in union corresponds to the habitual
pattern of sperm, ovum, and vital windiz combining, and purifies the
physical basis of existence.
The sequential absorption of the three letters purifies the three stages of
experience: appearance, increase, and attainment;*?
and the vital drops purify the white and red appearances, 14 and so on-
there is much more, but just knowing this much illuminates the rest.
The entrance of the wisdom beings's purifies skilled activities and
trainings.16
Sealing with the empowerments\7 purifies the inheritance of one's birthright.
Homage, confession, offerings, and praise purify the enjoyment of sense
objects.
Recitation of the mantra purifies irrelevant speech.
The dissolution phase purifies the death experience of that life,
and the reappearance in the deity's form purifies the intermediate existence.
Without going further, this summarizes it.
The initial going for refuge and generation of the intention of enlighten-
ment, and the concluding dedication and aspiration
are indispensable in the Great Vehicle is approach.
Consecration of offerings, feast gatherings, and so on
are additional ways through which you can effortlessly complete the two
accumulations. 120



Creation
Completion
སྐུར་ལྡང་པས་བར་སྲིད་སྦྱོང་བ་སོགས། །རྒྱས་སྤྲོས་མི་བྱ་འདི་རུ་མདོ་ཙམ་མོ། །
སྔོན་དུ་སྐྱབས་སེམས་རྗེས་སུ་བསྔོ་སྨོན་ནི། །ཐེག་ཆེན་ལམ་ལ་མེད་ཐབས་མེད་པ་
སྟེ། །མཆོད་པ་བྱིན་རླབས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོ་སོགས། །འབད་མེད་ཚོགས་
གཉིས་རྫོགས་པའི་ཡན་ལག་གོ །དེ་ཡང་སྦྱང་གཞི་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ་ཉིད། །
རྡོ་རྗེ་མཚན་དཔེ་གསལ་རྫོགས་སྐུར་བཞུགས་པས། །དེ་དང་འདྲ་བའི་རྣམ་པ་ལམ་
བྱེད་ཀྱིས། །སྦྱངས་འབྲས་གཞི་ལ་ཡོད་པའི་ལྷ་སྐུ་ཉིད། །མངོན་གྱུར་བྲལ་བའི་
འབྲས་བུ་མཐར་ཐུག་ཚེ། །རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆང་གི་གོ་འཕང་ཐོབ་ཅེས་ཟེར། ༈ །བསྐྱེད་
རིམ་རྒྱས་བསྡུས་ཇི་ལྟར་བསྒོམ་ཡང་རུང་། །རྣམ་པ་གསལ་བས་སྣང་ཡུལ་ཞེན་པ་
སྦྱོང་། །རྣམ་དག་དྲན་པས་གདོས་བཅས་མཚན་འཛིན་བྲལ། །ང་རྒྱལ་བརྟན་པས་
ཐ་མལ་ངར་འཛིན་གཞོམ། །དེ་ཕྱིར་དང་པོར་དབུ་དང་ཕྱག་ཞབས་སོགས། །རེ་རེ་
བཞིན་དུ་གསལ་འདེབས་ཅུང་གོམས་ནས། །སྐུ་གཟུགས་ཡོངས་རྫོབ་ས་ལམ་
གྱིས་གསལ་བར་བསྒོམ། །བསྒོམས་ཀྱང་མི་གནས་རྣམ་རྟོག་འཕྲོ་འདུག་ན། །
ཕྱག་ན་རྡོ་རྗེ་ལྟ་བུར་རིག་པ་གཏད། །རྒོད་ན་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་བྱིང་ན་གཙུག་ཏོར་གྱི། །ནོར་
བུ་ལྟ་བུར་རིག་པ་གཏད་ནས་བསྒོམ། །དེ་ནས་ཧ་ཅང་རྣམ་རྟོག་མི་འཕྲོ་ཡང་། །
རྣམ་པ་མི་གསལ་རྙོག་པ་འདྲ་འདུག་ན། །མིག་སྔར་ཐང་ཀའམ་ནི་སྡེར་སོའི་སྐུ། །
བཟོ་བྱེད་ལེགས་ལ་ཚོན་བཀྲག་ལྡན་པར་བཤམ། །རྣམ་རྟོག་མི་འཕྲོ་དེ་ལ་ཡུན་རིང་
བལྟ། །དེ་མ་ཐག་ཏུ་རང་ལུས་དེ་འདྲར་བསྐྱེད། །དེ་ནི་སྔར་གྱི་སྒོམ་དེ་བོགས་ཐོན་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
The basis of purification, which is this very buddha nature,
abides as the body, with its clear and complete vajra signs and marks.
A similar form is used as the path and leads to
the fruition of purification: that very divine form that existed as the basis.
At the time of ultimate fruition of actual freedom,
this is called "obtaining the state of Vajradhara."
Whether one meditates on an elaborate or concise version of creation stage,
there are three main points:
Clarity of form purifies attachment to the appearing object,
recollecting the purity 12 frees one from clinging to corporeality,
and maintaining pride vanquishes clinging to ordinary self.
As to the first, initially visualize each individual part, such as the head,
hands, feet, and so on,
and when somewhat used to that, meditate dearly on the entire form.
When meditation is not stable, and thoughts come and go,
focus your awareness on an implement, such as the vajra in the hand.
If you are languishing, focus on the crossed legs, and if sinking,
focus on something like a jewel in the deity's crown.
Then if there aren't so many active thoughts, but
the form is unclear and murky,
set before you a picture or statue
that is well made and appropriately painted,
and, without thinking, look at it for a long time.
Then immediately generate your own body in that image.
This will enhance the former meditation.
You may recollect the appropriate purities,
but this mental exercise might just add to discursive thoughts.
For the beginner it will become the cause of unclear, scattered meditation.
It is better to meditate on the deity's form as empty and light, like a rainbow,
and to know that the one who is doing that is one's own mind.
Mind itself, intrinsically free of a basis, is emptiness,
and the demonstration of its special qualities
is the arising of forms of faces, hands, and ornaments.



Creation
Completion
མལ་
འགྱུར། ༈ །རྣམ་དག་སོ་སོ་ཉིད་ནས་དྲན་བྱས་ཀྱང་། །བློ་ཡི་བརྩི་བསྒྲུང་བགྲང་རྣམ་
རྟོག་སྣོན་རྡོལ་མ་ཡིན། །ལས་དང་པོ་ལ་མི་གསལ་འཕྲོ་རྐྱེན་བྱེད། །དེ་བས་ལྷ་སྐུ་
སྟོང་གསལ་འཇའ་ཚོན་ལྟར། །དེ་ཉིད་བྱེད་མཁན་རང་གི་སེམས་ཡིན་ཏེ། །སེམས་
ཉིད་གདོད་ནས་རྩ་བྲལ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད། །དེ་ཡི་ཡོན་ཏན་ཁྱད་པར་སྟོན་བསྟན་པ་ལ། །
ཞལ་ཕྱག་རྒྱན་གྱི་རྣམ་པ་ཤར་ཞེས་བསྒོམ། ༈ །ང་རྒྱལ་མ་བསྒོམ་བདག་འཛིན་རྩ་
བ་ཆོད། །བདག་འཛིན་ཞིག་ཚེ་རང་སེམས་གར་གཏད་ཀྱང་། །དེ་ཡི་ངོ་བོར་ཁྲིག་
གེར་ཤར་བ་ཡིན། །དེ་ལྟར་བསྐྱེད་རིམ་རྩོལ་བས་བསྒོམ་པ་ཡིས། །བསྒོམ་པའི་ཚེ་
ན་དངོས་སྣང་ནུས་པ་བསིབ། །མ་བསྒོམ་ལྷར་འཆར་གསལ་སྣང་ཆུང་དུ་ཡིན།
བསྒོམ་དང་མི་བསྒོམ་བསྒོམས་མེད་པར་འཁྲུལ་སྣང་ཀུན། །ལྷ་དང་གཞལ་ཡས་
འཆར་བ་གསལ་སྣང་འབྲིང་། །རང་གིས་ལྷ་བསྒོམ་བསྒོམས་གཟུགས་ཅན་གཟུགས་
མེད་ཀྱིས། །རང་ཉིད་ལྟར་མཐོང་གསལ་སྣང་ཆེན་པོ་སྟེ། །རྙིང་ལུགས་རྣམ་པར་
སྨིན་པའི་རིག་འཛིན་ཟེར། ༈ །ལྟ་སྐུ་གསལ་ཡང་རང་སེམས་གསལ་སྣང་ཡིན། །
མི་གསལ་བློ་ཡི་ཚིམ་པའང་རང་སེམས་ཡིན། གསལ་འདོད་ཡང་སྒོམ་བསྒོམ་བྱེད་
པའི་མཁན་པོའང་སེམས། རང་སེམས་ཡེ་ཤེས་བླ་མ་ལྷ་ཡང་ཡིན། །ཐམས་ཅད་
སེམས་སྣང་སེམས་ཉིད་མ་བཅོས་པ། །རིམ་པ་གཉིས་ལམ་གྱི་གཅེས་གནད་མཐར་
ཐུག་སྟེ། །བསྐྱེད་པའི་རིམ་པ་མང་པོ་ཅི་བསྒོམ་ཡང་། །མ་ཡེངས་ཙམ་གྱི་དྲན་
རིག་གསལ་ཐེབ་ན། །གསལ་ན་གསལ་སྟོང་རྟོགས་ན་རྙོགས་སྟོང་འཆར།



The Essential Point of Creation and Completion
Do not meditate on pride; cut through the root of ego-clinging.
When ego-clinging is destroyed, wherever one's mind focuses,
its essence arises vividly.
In this way, by meditation on the creation stage with effort,
while actually meditating, the impact of "real" appearances will be
diminished,
and without meditating, the deity arises.
This is the lesser experience of luminous appearance. 122
When all deluded appearances, regardless of meditating or not,
arise as the deity and divine palace, it is intermediate luminous appearance.
When you meditate on the deity and form and formless beings see you as
that deity,
it is the great luminous appearance, called a maturation knowledge-
holder!23 in the Ancient tradition.
The clear form of the deity is the luminous appearance of your own mind,
and the unclear, dissatisfying experience is also your mind!
So also, mind is the one who desires clarity and cries again,
and mind is the wisdom deity and guru.
Everything is mind's appearance, and yet mind itself is uncontrived.
The beauty of this ultimate essential point of the approach of the two stages
is that no matter which of the many creation stages you do,
if you apply clear awareness and mindfulness that is merely undistracted,
when the meditation is clear, it arises as clarity-emptiness and when
obscure, as obscurity-emptiness!
In general, creation stage is a contrivance,
but the path of contrivance leads to the authentic natural state.
With the mental conviction of the lack of reality in the root or ground
of deluded grasping to deluded appearance,
resting in a pristine state is completion stage itself, the actual natural state.
The first stage is the provisional meaning and the latter the definitive
meaning.
It is said that if you understand mind, knowing this one thing illuminates
everything,



Creation
Completion
༈ །སྤྱིར་ནི་བསྐྱེད་པའི་རིམ་པ་བཅོས་མ་ཡིན། །བཅོས་མའི་ལམ་གྱིས་རྣལ་མའི་
དོན་ལ་ཁྲིད། །འཁྲུལ་སྣང་འཁྲུལ་འཛིན་གཞི་རྩ་མ་གྲུབ་པར། །བློ་ཐག་ཆོད་པས་
མ་བཅོས་སོར་བཞག་ནི། །རྫོགས་རིམ་ཉིད་དེ་རྣལ་མ་དངོས་ཡིན་ནོ། །སྔ་མ་དྲང་
དོན་ཕྱི་མ་ངེས་དོན་ཡིན། །སེམས་དོན་ཤེས་ན་གཅིག་ཤེས་ཀུན་གྲོལ་ཏེ། །སེམས་
དོན་མ་ཤེས་ཀུན་ཤེས་གཅིག་རྡུག་སྡུག་ཟེར། །སྟོང་ཉིད་རུང་ན་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀུན་རུང་
ལ། །སྟོང་ཉིད་མི་རུང་ཐམས་ཅད་མི་རུང་ཞེས། །སློབ་དཔོན་ཆེན་པོ་འཕགས་པ་ཀླུ་
ཡིས་གསུངས། །ཕྱག་རྫོགས་དབུ་མ་སྤྲོས་བྲལ་དོན་དམ་དང་། །རྒྱལ་བའི་
དགོངས་པ་གདོད་མའི་གནས་ལུགས་དང་། །ཤེས་རབ་ཕར་ཕྱིན་ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་པ་
སོགས། །ཐ་སྙད་མིང་གི་རྣམ་གྲངས་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀུན། །དོན་ལ་སེམས་ཉིད་
དངོས་པོའི་གཤིས་ལུགས་ཉིད། །ཅིར་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་བློ་འདས་བརྗོད་བྲལ་བ། །དེ་
ཉིད་གཅིག་པུར་འདུ་ཚུལ་གསུངས་པ་ལགས། ༈ །དེ་ལྟར་སེམས་དོན་སྒོམ་པར་
བྱེད་པ་ལའང་། །མོས་གུས་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་ནང་ནས་ཤར་བ་ལ། །དགོས་པ་མིན་ཀྱང་
གང་ཟག་ཕལ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས། །བསྒོམ་བྱ་སེམས་ཀྱི་གནས་ལུགས་ཅུང་ཟད་རེ། །
མ་ཤེས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན་ལ་བསྒོམ་པར་སྲིད། ༈ །རྣམ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་བརྒྱད་མ་དག་
འཁྲུལ་སེམས་ཡིན། །དེ་ཡི་ངོ་བོར་དག་པའི་ཀུན་གཞི་གནས། །དེ་ལ་ཉིད་སྒྲས་
སྨྲས་བསྟན་ཕྱིར་སེམས་ཉིད་བྱ། །སྒོ་ལྔའི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་དང་དྲུག་པའི་ཡིད། །ཉོན་
ཡིད་ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་བཅས་པ་ལ། །ཚོགས་བརྒྱད་ཞེས་སུ་རང་བྱུང་ཀུན་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
but if you don't understand mind, knowing everything obscures the
one thing.
The great master Noble Nagarjuna said it this way:
"Where there is appropriare understanding of emptiness, all things are
appropriate,
and if there is no appropriate understanding of emptiness, nothing is."
All of the various designations, such as
mahamudra, dzogchen,"24 middle path, * unembellished, ultimate,
enlightened intention of the victorious ones, intrinsic nature,
perfection of wisdom, view, meditation, and action, and so on,
indicate that mind itself and the true nature of objects
have no true reality whatsoever and are beyond intellect and inexpressible.
This one point could well be the synopsis of all teachings.
In bringing about meditation on the nature of mind in this way,
the power of devotion causes it to arise from within,
and more is really unnecessary. However, most ordinary people
know very little about the meditation subject--the nature of mind,
and their meditation could prove ineffectual.
Deluded mind consists of the eight impure groups of consciousness.125
The essence of that abides as the pure foundation."27
In order to indicate the suchness of than the term "mind itself":21 is used.
The All-knowing Rangjung!29 held that
the eight groups are the five sense consciousnesses, the mental
consciousness,
afflictive mind, and the foundation consciousness.
Since the "instantaneous mind"** conditions all of those,
when counted together, there are also held to be nine groups.
The sutras mention many terms such as "appropriating
consciousness,"
"deluded mind," "cognitive obscuration," and "foundation consciousness."
Since it is taught that the intrinsic nature of the foundation is virtue,
it is essentially self-liberated buddha nature.
It is not the foundation itself that is removed, but it abides as the founda-
tion of what is removed.



Creation o Completion
མཁྱེན་བཞེད། །དེ་མ་ཐག་ཡིད་དེ་ཀུན་འདུ་བྱེད་ཕྱིར། །ཟུར་དུ་མི་འདྲེན་ཚོགས་
དགར་བཞེད་པའང་ཡོད། །མདོ་ལས་ལེན་པའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་གསུངས་པ་དང་། །
འཁྲུལ་པའི་སེམས་དང་ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ་པ་དང་། །ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་མིང་གི་
རྣམ་གྲངས་ཡིན། །ཀུན་གཞི་ངང་ལུགས་དགེ་བ་ཞེས་གསུངས་ཕྱིར། །དེ་ཡི་ངོ་བོ་
རང་གྲོལ་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་། །བྲལ་བྱའི་གཞི་མིན་བྲལ་བའི་གཞི་རུ་གནས། །དེ་
ཡང་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཚོགས་བརྒྱད་ཐག་ཁྲ་ལ། །སྦྲུལ་དུ་འཛིན་ལྟར་གཤིས་ལ་མི་གནས་
པས། །འཁྲུལ་དུས་ཉིད་ནས་རང་གི་ངོ་བོས་སྟོང་། །ནམ་ཙམ་འཁྲུལ་ན་ཐོག་མ་
མེད་པ་ནས། །ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་མ་རིག་པ་ཡིས་སྒྲིབ་བསྒྲིབ། །དེ་ཡང་དཔེར་ན་
མེ་ལོང་གསལ་བ་ཡི། །དངས་པའི་ཆ་ནི་བདེ་གཤེགས་སྙིང་པོ་ཡིན། །གཡའ་
ཁམས་ཡོད་པ་ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་སམ། །ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ་པ་ལྷན་སྐྱེས་མ་རིག་
ཟེར། །གཡའ་དྲིས་གོས་ལྟར་ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་སྟེང་། །བག་ཆགས་བསགས་
པ་ཉོན་མོངས་སྒྲིབ་པ་ཡིན། །རྣམ་ཤེས་དེ་ཡི་ངོ་བོ་སྟོང་པ་ལ། །བདག་ཏུ་འཛིན་
ཅིང་གསལ་ཆ་ཡུལ་དུ་བཟུང་། །དེ་མ་ཐག་པའི་ཡིད་ཀྱིས་ཚོགས་དྲུག་གཡོ། །
ཡུལ་དང་དབང་པོ་གཉིས་ཀ་འཕྲད་རྐྱེན་བྱེད། །རང་ལ་གཞན་དུ་མེད་ཀྱང་གཉིས་
སྣང་དབང་། །དཔེར་ན་མིག་གིས་གཟུགས་སུ་མཐོང་བ་དང་། །མིག་ཤེས་དེ་
ལས་གཞན་པའི་གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱང་། །གསལ་ཆ་གཟུགས་དང་སྟོང་ཆ་དབང་པོར་
འཁྲུལ། །དེ་མ་ཐག་པའི་ཡིད་ཀྱིས་མཚམས་སྦྱར་བྱེད། །མིག་གི་ཤེས་པ་རྟོག་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
So, for instance, the eight consciousness groups are like a variegated rope
that is perceived as a snake, though that is not its true character:
From the very first moment of this delusion, it was itself essentially empty.
It is from beginningless time
that co-emergent ignorance has obscured true nature.
For example, the clear and limpid aspect
of a mirror is the buddha nature,
and the tarnish on it is the foundation consciousness,
also called cognitive obscuration or co-emergent ignorance.
Like the coat of tarnish, the foundation consciousness wears
the collection of habitual patterns, the obscuration of afflictive emotions.
The essentially empty nature of consciousness
is identified as the self, and objective reality is projected onto its luminous
aspect.
The instantaneous mind moves the six consciousness groups
and causes the meeting of object and organ.
Though nothing other than mind itself, the appearance of duality
predominates.
For example, when the eye perceives a form,
although there is no form outside of the eye consciousness,
the luminous aspect is mistaken for form and the empty aspect for
the organ,
The instantaneous mind function coalesces the process:
eye consciousness initially arises undeluded, free of concept,
but instantaneously it is suppressed and
the feeling of duality arises, and with it the mental sixth consciousness.
Experiencing happiness, suffering, or neutrality,
the discriminations of attachment, aversion, and ignorance arise, and this is
the afflictive mind.
Then through rejection or acceptance, the foundation consciousness is
imprinted
with the accumulation of karmic action, also called formation.131
When the sixth mind is counted together with the instantaneous mind,
perceiving externally with the five senses, it is the object;
when the afflictive mind functions with the instantaneous mind,
directed inward, it leaves habitual patterns in the foundation.



Creation & Comp lion
བྲལ་མ་འཁྲུལ་སྐྱེ། །དེ་མ་ཐག་པས་དེ་འགགས་གཟུང་འཛིན་གྱི། །ཚོར་བ་སྐྱེས་ཚེ་
དྲུག་པའི་ཡིད་ཀྱང་ལངས། །བདེ་སྡུག་བཏང་སྙོམས་མྱོང་བས་ཆགས་སྡང་དང་། །
རྨོངས་པའི་འདུ་ཤེས་སྐྱེ་བ་ཉོན་ཡིད་ཡིན། །སྤང་བླང་བྱས་ནས་ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་
ཤེས་སྟེང་། །ལས་བསགས་པ་ལ་འདུ་བྱེད་ཤེས་ཞེས་ཀྱང་ཟེར། །དྲུག་ཡིད་དེ་མ་
ཐག་ཡིད་ལ་བསྡོམས་བསྡོངས་ན། །སྒོ་ལྔ་ཁ་ཕྱིར་བལྟས་པས་ཡུལ་ཡིན་ལ། །ཉོན་
ཡིད་དེ་མ་ཐག་ཡིད་ལ་བསྡོམས་བསྡོངས་ན། །ནང་དུ་ཁ་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་གཞིར་གཞི་བག་
ཆགས་འཇོག །དེར་འཇོག་ལས་ནི་ལུང་མ་བསྟན་པར་གནས། །རྣམ་པར་མ་སྨིན་
བར་དུ་ཆུད་མི་ཟ། ༈ །རྣམ་དཀར་དགེ་བའི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས་ནི། །ཀུན་
གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་སྟེང་དུ་བསགས་མི་ནུས། །དེ་ཚེ་ཉོན་ཡིད་རྣམ་བྱང་ཤེས་ཡིད་གྱུར་
མྱུར་དང་། །གཉེན་པོ་ཡིན་ཕྱིར་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྟེང་དུ་འཇོག །དགེ་བའི་སེམས་པ་ཀུན་
གཞིའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཀྱི། །རང་མདངས་ལས་བྱུང་དགེ་རྩ་བསགས་པ་ཡང་། བྲལ་བའི་
རྐྱེན་དང་རྣམ་སྨིན་རྒྱུར་འགྱུར་ལས། །བར་མ་དོ་རུ་ཆུད་ཟོས་འགྲོ་མི་སྲིད། ཀུན་
གཞི་ཕྱི་ཡི་ཡུལ་དང་ནང་དབང་པོ། །བར་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་ཀུན་གྱི་རྒྱུ་རུ་བྱེད། །ཉོན་ཡིད་
སྤྲིན་བཞིན་ཚོགས་དྲུག་ཆར་ལྟ་བུ། །ལས་བྱས་པ་རྣམས་ཆུ་བོ་བག་ཆགས་ཀྱི། །
ཀུན་གཞི་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་དཔེ་ཡིན་དེ་ཀུན་རྒྱུན། །འབྲེལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་དེ་མ་ཐག་ཡིད་ཡིན།
༈ །ཉམས་ལེན་པ་རྣམས་ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ལས། །དེ་མ་ཐག་ཡིད་ལངས་པ་
ཙམ་ཉིད་ལས། །དེ་རྒྱུན་མི་མཐུད་དེ་ཡི་སྟེང་དུ་བཞག །དེ་ལ་སྐད་ཅིག་དང་པོར་



The Essential Point of Creation and Completion
Left there, the karma abides without effect
as unavoidable potential until it ripens.
Habitual patterns of totally pure virtue
cannot be accumulated as imprints on the foundation consciousness.
In this case, the afflictive mind becomes the fully purified mind,
and since that is the remedy, virtue is imprinted on pristine wisdom.
Virtuous thoughts arise from the intrinsic radiance of foundation wisdom.
This accumulation of the roots of virtue
becomes the condition of freedom and cause of complete fruition 132
and also cannot be interrupted or lost.
With the foundation functioning as the cause of the outer objects, inner
sense faculties,
and all the consciousnesses in between,
the afflictive mind is like the clouds, the six groups like rain,
the karmic actions are the rivers, and
habitual patterns of the foundation are the ocean.
In this example, the agent that connects all of this in some kind of conti-
nuity is the instantaneous mind.
For the practitioner, this means that just as soon as the instantaneous mind
barely arises from the foundation consciousness,
without any extension of duration, you should place the attention directly
upon it.
This is called liberation in the first moment, or
vanquished at first sight, 11 in certain doctrinal terms.
When the sixth mind consciousness and afflictive mind have just arisen,
and are recognized through mindfulness and liberated in their own place,
it is called liberation in the second or third moment.
However, since that discursive thought is the dynamic energy of mind,
it is impossible for thoughts of attachment and aversion not to arise.
However, if you rely on mindful awareness, discursive thoughts cannot
accumulate karma.
It is like pouring water into a vase with a hole in the bottom.



Creation & Completion
གྲོལ་ཞེས་དང་། །ཆོས་སྐད་འགའ་ལ་འབུར་འཇོམས་མགོ་ཐུག་ཟེར། །དྲུག་པའི་
ཡིད་དང་ཉོན་ཡིད་ལངས་ཙམ་ནས། །དྲན་པས་ཟིན་ཚེ་རང་སར་གྲོལ་བ་ལ། །སྐད་
ཅིག་གཉིས་པ་གསུམ་པར་གྲོལ་ཞེས་གསུངས། །འོན་ཀྱང་རྣམ་རྟོག་སེམས་ཀྱི་
རྩལ་ཡིན་པས། །ཆགས་སྡང་རྟོག་པ་མི་ཤར་མི་སྲིད་ཀྱང་པས། །དྲན་ཤེས་བརྟན་
ན་ལས་བསགས་མི་ནུས་ཏེ། །བུམ་པ་ཞབས་རྡོལ་ནང་དུ་ཆུ་བླུག་འདྲ། །འཁྲུལ་
རྟོག་རིག་པ་ཕྱེད་ཆ་མཉམ་ཉམས་པ་ལ། །སོར་རྟོག་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་ཞེན་རྟོག་གཞལ་ཞེས་
གསུངས། །དཔེར་ན་རྩ་སྦྱར་ཕྲ་མོ་མེས་ཟིན་འདྲ། །མེ་དང་རྩྭ་སྦུར་གཉིས་ཀར་
སྣང་ན་ཡང་། །སྐད་ཅིག་ཉིད་ལ་མེ་རུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར། །མེ་ཡིན་བྱས་ཀྱང་ཆོག་
པ་ཇི་བཞིན་ནོ། ༈ །མདོར་ན་ད་ལྟ་ཅི་ཡང་མི་དྲན་པའི། །ནག་ཐོམ་ལུང་མ་བསྟན་
ཏུ་གནས་པ་ནི། །ཀུན་གཞིའི་རྣམ་ཤེས་ཤེས་བྱའི་སྒྲིབ་པ་ཡིན། །ལྷན་སྐྱེས་མ་རིག་
ཅེས་པའང་དེ་ལ་བྱ། །ཡུལ་དབང་གཉིས་འཕྲད་ལམ་གྱི་དང་ལྟ་བའི། །གཟུགས་
མཐོང་སྐད་ཅིག་མིག་ཤེས་རྟོག་མེད་ཟེར། །དེ་ལ་རེག་པའི་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་ཚོར་བར་
གསུངས་། །དུང་དཀར་ལེགས་ལ་ཡིད་སེམས་དགའ་བ་སོགས། །ཆགས་སྡང་
སྐྱེ་དུས་ཉོན་ཡིད་སླེབས་པ་ཡིན། །འདུ་ཤེས་ཞེས་གསུངས་དེ་ལས་འདུ་བྱེད་
སོགས། །རྟེན་འབྲེལ་བཅུ་གཉིས་སྲིད་པའི་འཁོར་ལོ་བསྐོར། །མིག་ཤེས་ཡིད་
ཤེས་བཀག་ཀྱང་མ་ཁེག་ལ། །ལས་ཀྱི་བག་ཆགས་བསགས་པའི་ནུས་པ་མེད། །
ཕྱི་མ་ཉོན་ཡིད་དབང་དུ་ཤོར་བ་ན། །ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་པའི་གནད་མེད་ཐ་མལ་པ། །



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
The deluded thought and the aspect of awareness that distinguishes it
are equal,
for the discriminating thought itself measures the thought of attachment.
It is like fire alighting on fine grass husks:
although the fire and the husks appeared as two things,
they instantly become just fire.
So it could be called simply fire.
In short, our present state of neutrality,
the darkness of total lack of awareness,
is the cognitive obscuration of foundation consciousness.
It is also called co-emergent ignorance.
When an object and the sense organ meet, such as seeing a conch shell on
the road,
in the first instant of seeing the form, the eye consciousness is said to be
without concept.
But due to that contact, what is called "feeling" occurs,
and then, if it is a nice white conch, mental pleasure, and so on.
At this point, with the arising of attachment or aversion, afflictive mind has
arrived.
From what is called "perception" comes “formation," and so on:
through the twelve interdependent links' the wheel of existence turns.
Even if you tried to block eye consciousness and mental
consciousness, they wouldn't cease,
but they don't have the power to accumulate karmic habitual patterns.
But when finally afflictive mind has taken over,
for an ordinary person without recourse to view, meditation, and action,
habitual patterns imprinted on the foundation will accumulate.
For that reason you should try not to fall under its power.
The instantaneous mind is the one that connects this whole process, like
the force of water.
If you understand the significance of the eight groups in this way,
and are skilled in applying it directly to practice,
you can cut through the dualistic relationship of the six groups and their
objects,
and then the six sense objects will not have the power to disturb meditation.



Creation
Completion
ཡིན་ཕྱིར་ཀུན་གཞིའི་སྟེང་དུ་བག་ཆགས་གསོག །དེ་ཕྱིར་དེ་ཡི་དབང་དུ་མ་ཤོར་
འཚལ། །དེ་རྒྱུན་འབྲེལ་བྱེད་དེ་མ་ཐག་ཡིད་དེ། ཆུ་ཡི་ཤུགས་འདྲ་དེ་ལྟར་ཚོགས་
བརྒྱད་ཀྱི། །གནད་ཤེས་ཉམས་ལེན་སྲོང་སྲོལ་དུ་འཛུད་མཛུད་མཁས་ན། །ཚོགས་
དྲུག་ཡུལ་ལ་གཟུང་འཛིན་འབྲེལ་ཆད་པས། །ཡུལ་དྲུག་རྐྱེན་གྱིས་མཉམ་བཞག་
གཡོ་མི་ནུས། །དབང་ཤེས་ནང་དུ་ལྡོག་པར་རྩོམ་རྩོན་པ་ཡིན། །དེ་ཚེ་རླུང་བཅུ་
ལས་སུ་རུང་བའི་རྟགས། །དུ་བ་སྨིག་རྒྱུ་སྒྲ་གཅན་ལ་སོགས་འཆར། །དངོས་སྣང་
ནུས་པ་ཉམས་པས་སྒྲིབ་མེད་དུ། ལྷ་སྐུ་ཐིག་ལེ་ལ་སོགས་གྲངས་མེད་པར། །ཕྱི་
ནང་རང་ལུས་རང་སེམས་གར་གཏད་དུ། །རེ་དོགས་བྱ་རྩོལ་མི་དགོས་ཤུགས་
ཀྱིས་འཆར། །དོད་ཐོབ་རྟགས་སུ་རྣམ་གཡེང་ལོང་གཏམ་དང་། །བྱ་བྱེད་འབྲེལ་
འདྲིས་འདྲེས་སྤྱོད་པར་འཇུག་མི་སྤྲོ། །རྣམ་གཡེང་མེད་པའི་དབེན་པ་ཁོ་ན་འདོད། །
རྣམ་རྟོག་རྒྱུན་ཆད་ནམ་མཁའ་གཡའ་དག་འདྲ། །ལུས་ངག་ཡིད་ལ་བདེ་གསལ་
མི་རྟོག་ཉམས། །དཔག་མེད་འཆར་ཡང་ངེས་ཤེས་ཕྱོགས་རེ་བས། །ལམ་རྟགས་
ཙམ་ལས་ས་ཟིན་གང་ཡང་མེད། །ཡུལ་དུ་བྱས་ཚད་སྐྱེ་གནས་འཕོ་འགྱུར་ཅན། །
བརྟག་མི་ཐུབ་པར་གྲུབ་བརྙེས་ཡོངས་ཀྱིས་བཞེད། །རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཡུལ་མེད་
ཟང་ཟངས་ཐལ་དུ། །མངོན་གྱུར་ཉིད་ལ་རྟོགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་བཏགས་རྟགས། །དེ་ཚེ་
ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་པའི་ཞེ་འདོད་ཟད། །ཐ་མལ་ཤེས་པ་དེ་ཀའི་ཐོག་ཏུ་བབ། །སྔར་ནས་
ཡོད་པ་ད་རེས་ཐག་ཆོད་པས། །བྱ་བ་ཟིན་པའི་སྐྱེས་བུ་བློ་བདེ་ལྟར། །འབད་རྩོལ་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
This is the beginning of turning the sense organs and their
consciousnesses inward.
At that time, the signs that the ten vital winds have matured
are experiences of smoke, mirages, eclipses, and so on.
The power of "real" appearances is diminished; and without obscurity,
countless deities, spheres, and so on appear wherever you focus,
outwardly and inwardly, in your body and your mind,
automatically arising without effort, expectation, or anxiety.
As a sign of atraining warmth, * you are no longer interested in
useless communication and associacions,
and you desire only to remain in solitude without distraction.
The flow of thoughts is cut off and, like the clear sky,
boundless experiences of bliss, clarity, and nonthought:37 arise in body,
speech, and mind.
However, these are only signs on the path, a few approximations of
confidence,
and have nothing whatsoever to do with attainment of higher stages.
When these experiences are objectified, they are subject to arising, ceasing,
and changing,
and cannot be permanent, according to all adepts. 138
True actualization of the open spaciousness of inherent wisdom without
object
is termed "the pristine wisdom of realization."
At that time, the desires and aversions of view, meditation, and action are
exhausted,
and one simply falls directly upon ordinary mind.
With the absolute conviction of recognizing what has been there all along,
like a contented person who has finished all work,
all effort is dropped: it is the ultimate fruition.
Deceiving appearances appear in variety as non-appearance.
Though appearing to appear, being essentially without reality, they
are empty.
Of mind itself, luminous awareness without foundation, free of basis,
you cannot say anything in regard to existence or non-existence.
In the levels higher than mahayoga,199 che sublime view is that total purity



Creation de Completion
ཞིག་པ་འབྲས་བུའི་མཐར་ཐུག་གོ། ༈ སྣང་བ་རྫུན་སྣང་མེད་བཞིན་སྣ་ཚོགས་
སྣང་། །སྣང་བཞིན་ངོ་བོ་མ་གྲུབ་སྟོང་པ་ཡིན། །སེམས་ཉིད་གསལ་རིག་གཞི་མེད་
རྩ་བྲལ་ཏེ། །ཡོད་མེད་ལ་སོགས་གང་དུའང་བརྗོད་མི་ནུས། ༈ །མ་ཧཱ་ཡོ་ག་ཡན་
ཆད་རྣམ་བྱང་དང་། །སྡུག་བསྔལ་བདེན་པ་དབྱེར་མེད་ལྟ་བས་འཕགས། །རིམ་
གཉིས་བསྒོམས་པས་དོན་དམ་མངོན་གྱུར་ཚེ། ཀུན་རྫོབ་གཞི་མེད་རྩ་བྲལ་རང་
ཡལ་འདོད། །དེ་ཕྱིར་སྣང་སེམས་གཉིས་བསྡུས་འཁོར་འདས་ཆོས། །ཅིར་ཡང་
མ་གྲུབ་ཅིར་ཡང་འཆར་ཤེས་ན། །ཐོས་བསམ་གནད་དུ་སོང་བའི་གཏན་ཚིགས་
ཡིན། ༈ །རྫུན་སྣང་དེ་དག་སྦྱང་བསྒྱུར་སོར་བཞག་སོགས། །བསྐྱེད་རྫོགས་
དམིགས་བཅས་དམིགས་མེད་ཐབས་དུ་མས། །སྦྱོང་སྦྱོར་ཚུལ་ཉམས་ལེན་ཀུན་གྱི་
གཅེས་གནད་ནི། །དུས་གསུམ་རྣམ་རྟོག་ཆུ་ཡི་གཉེར་མ་འདྲ།. །ཟད་པ་མེད་པ་དེ་
རྗེས་མི་འབྲང་བར། །གོང་ལ་མཉམ་པར་བཞག་བྱ་དེ་ཉིད་ལ། །བཟོ་གནས་མཁན་
པོས་སྐུད་པ་འཁེལ་བ་ལྟར། །སྒྲིམ་ལྷོད་བར་མ་ཁམས་དང་བསྟུན་མཁས་ཀྱིས། །
དྲན་པའི་རྒྱང་སོ་ཡང་ནས་ཡང་དུ་འཛུག །ཅུང་ཟད་གོམས་པས་དྲན་གྲངས་ཇེ་
མང་འགྲོ། །རྩེ་གཅིག་ལ་སོགས་ཉམས་རྣམས་རིམ་གྱིས་སྐྱེ། །སེམས་སམ་རིག་
པའི་སྙིགས་མ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ། །ཐ་མལ་འོག་འགྱུར་མི་བཏང་གསལ་ངར་འདོན། །
བྱིང་རྒོད་གཉིས་ལས་འོག་འགྱུ་གནོད་ཚབས་ཆེ། །སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་རྩད་
བདར་ཆོད་པའི་ཚེ། །དུ་མར་སྣང་ཡང་གཅིག་ལས་མེད་པ་དང་། །གཅིག་པུ་དེ་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
is inseparable from the truth of suffering.'40
When the absolute is actualized through meditation on the two stages,
it follows that the relative, which is without foundation and basis, auto-
matically disappears.
Therefore, all phenomena of cyclic existence or transcendence, included
within both appearance and mind,
have no reality whatsoever but arise in any way whatsoever.
When this is realized, it is proof that listening and contemplating have hit
the mark
The many techniques of creation and completion, both with and without
visualization,
such as rejecting or transforming or resting in deceiving appearances,
are purificatory methods, and that is where the value of all practice lies.
Thoughts of past, present, and future are like ripples on water, never ending.
Without pursuing them, whatever the subject of concentration is,
upon that itself, like a master craftsperson spinning yarn,
not too tight or too loose, but just right for the material,
the wise direct their watchguard of mindfulness again and again.
When somewhat used to that, mindfulness will grow stronger,
and the progressive experiences, such as one-pointedness, 14% will arise.
Don't fall into the so-called residue of mind or awareness,
the ordinary mental undercurrent, but rather intensify the clarity.
The undercurrent can be more harmful than both sinking and scattering. 142
When you establish for certain the true nature of mind,
many things arise, yet they are not other than the one.
That one thing also cannot even be grasped by objective clinging.
Looking at it, it is not seen, being without color or shape.
This is a sign of its being without foundation, free of basis, and beyond
intellect.
Its essence is empty, its nature clarity,
and its dynamic play of compassion arises without inhibition.
Indeed, it is the three bodies!) that have been spontaneously present
all along.



Creation
Completion
ཡང་བཟུང་བས་མི་ཟིན་ཞིང་། །བལྟས་པས་མི་མཐོང་ཁ་དོག་དབྱིབས་མེད་པ། །
གཞི་མེད་རྩ་བྲལ་བློ་འདས་ཡིན་པའི་རྟགས། །དེ་ཡི་ངོ་བོ་སྟོང་ལ་རང་བཞིན་
གསལ། །ཐུགས་རྗེའི་རོལ་རྩལ་འགགག་པ་མེད་འཆར་བ། །སྐུ་གསུམ་ཉིད་དུ་ཡེ་
ནས་ལྷུན་གྲུབ་ལགས། ༈ །རྣམ་རྟོག་བཀག་ཀྱང་ཁེག་པ་མི་འོང་བས། །མ་
བཀག་གཅིག་ཤར་གཉིས་ཤར་ཤར་དུ་ཆུག། ཤར་ཚེ་གར་འགྲོར་བཏང་ནས་རྒྱང་
སོ་ཚུགས། །དེ་ཚེ་འགྲོ་ས་མི་རྙེད་ཚུར་ལ་ལོག། །དཔེར་ན་རྫོང་ལས་འཕུར་བའི་བྱ་
རོག་བཞིན། །མེ་རོ་སྟོད་དེ་རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཞིན་དུ་གནས། ༈ །དྲན་པ་ཡེངས་མེད་
གནས་པ་འཁོར་ཡུག་རྣམས། །ཅུང་ཟད་འབྱུང་དཀའ་གོམ་སྒོམ་ཤུགས་ཆུང་བས་
ལེན། །འོན་ཀྱང་སྣ་སུན་མི་བྱེད་རྒྱུན་སྐྱོང་གནད། །གནས་པ་བརྟན་ཡང་ཀྱང་འཛིན་
ཞེན་ཞེས་མ་གྲོལ་ན། །ཁམས་གསུམ་ཉིད་ལས་འཕགས་པར་མི་ནུས་ཀྱང་། །རྟོག་
པའི་རང་ངོ་རྣམ་རྟོག་དོན་མ་རྟོགས་འགྱུ་ཆས་སྤུར། །ཆུ་སྣོད་གཡོ་བས་ཟླ་གཟུགས་མི་
མཐོང་འདྲ། །དེ་ཕྱིར་ཐོག་མར་ཞི་གནས་ཉམས་བསྒྲུབས་ནས། །རྗེས་ལ་ལྷག་
མཐོང་བསྒོམ་པ་ཐུན་མོང་ལམ། ༈ །སྤྱིར་ནི་ཕྱག་ཆེན་མན་ཆད་སེམས་ལམ་
བྱེད། །རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཐུན་མོང་པའང་དེ་ཕྱོགས་མཐུན། །ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་མན་ངག་
སྡེ་པ་ནི། །རིག་པ་ལམ་བྱེད་ཉིད་དུ་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། །ཞི་གནས་ལམ་ནས་
འཇུག་དགོས་ངེས་པ་མེད། །རིག་པ་རྗེན་པ་སྒྲོ་སྐུར་བྲལ་བ་ཉིད། །རང་ངོ་འཕྲོད་ན་
དེ་ལ་གོམས་པས་ཆོག །འོན་ཀྱང་རང་ངོ་འཆུག་མེད་མ་འཕྲོད་ན། །མན་ངག་ཟབ་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
You try to block thoughts and yet they are not blocked...
first one unblocked thought arises, then a second...let them arise.
When they arise, send them wherever they go and stand guard.
Since there is no place for them to go, they have returned,
like a crow who has taken off from a ship.
Rest like the movement of swells at sea.
Undistracted mindfulness and continuous mental abiding
may be difficult, and you must proceed by small steps.
Nevertheless, it is crucial to maintain the effort without becoming
discouraged.
If abiding is stabilized but attachment to it is not released,
you will not be able to surpass the three realms,i
and the facade of realization will be whisked away by the movement of
thoughts.
One cannot see the moon's reflection in disturbed water,
Therefore, first develop the experiences of calm abiding,
and then meditate on superior insight;:45 this is the normal approach.
Generally, everything up to the mahamudra is termed "mind path."
Common dzogchen is also included in this.
The class of exceptional esoteric instructions:
is said to be the awareness path,”:47 and as such,
it is not definite that one must begin with calm abiding.
When the nature of naked awareness itself, without exaggeration or
denial,** is revealed,
it is sufficient just to become accustomed to that.
However, if the true nature is not unerringly revealed,
then even the profound esoteric instructions will be difficult to assimilate.
In that case, it is better to tread the gradual path.
"Nonmeditation," "nondistraction," "abandoning mental doings,"
"maintaining whatever arises," "ordinary mind,"
and "free of intellect all mean uncontrived.



Creation de Completion
ཀྱང་རྒྱུད་ཐོག་ལོན་པར་དཀའ། །དེ་འདྲས་རིམ་བགྲོད་ལམ་ལ་འབད་ན་ལེགས། །
སྒོམ་མེད་ཡེངས་མེད་ཡིད་བྱེད་སྤངས་པ་དང་། །གང་ཤར་སྐྱོང་དང་ཐ་མལ་ཤེས་
པ་དང་། །བློ་བྲལ་རྣམས་ནི་མ་བཅོས་པ་ཡི་དོན། །གནས་འགྱུ་གང་ཡང་རིག་ན་
བཅོས་མི་དགོས། །ཡང་དྲན་བྲལ་ཡང་འཇོག་རྟོག་པ་ཉིད་འཁྲུལ་ལགས། །རིག་
ཙམ་དེ་ཡི་སྟེང་དུ་འཇོག་པ་ལ། །གང་ཤར་སྐྱོང་ཞེས་གྲུབ་བརྙེས་ཡོངས་ཀྱི་ལམ། །
ཉམས་ལེན་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྦྱོར་ཚུལ་དབུ་མ་དང་། །ཞི་གཅོད་ཕྱག་ཆེན་རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཐུན་
མོང་གི། །རྣམ་རྟོག་གང་ཤར་དེ་ལ་བཟོ་མེད་དུ། །གཅེར་གྱིས་བལྟས་པས་གྲོལ་
བ་ལམ་དུ་བྱེད། །རྫོགས་ཆེན་མན་ངག་སྙིང་ཐིག་ལམ་ལས་ནི། །གང་ཤར་རྣམ་
རྟོག་རིག་མཁན་རང་ངོ་ལ། །མང་ནང་དུ་བལྟས་པས་ཆོས་ཉིད་ངོ་བོ་མཇལ། །
འཁྲུལ་སྣང་རྣམ་རྟོག་གཏད་མེད་རང་སར་ཡལ། །སྔ་མ་ཁ་ཕྱིར་ལྟ་བལྟ་བས་གཉིས་
འཛིན་ཡོད། །ཕྱི་མ་ནང་བལྟས་གཉིས་མེད་ཉིད་ཡིན་ཅེས། །མཁས་གྲུབ་བླ་མ་
འགའ་ཡི་ཞལ་ལས་ཐོས། །དེ་ལྟ་ན་ཡང་རྣམ་རྟོག་གྲོལ་ཚུལ་གྱིས། །རིམ་པ་
གསུམ་ལ་ངེས་ཤེས་ཉམས་མྱོང་དགོས། ༈ །དེ་ཡང་བི་མ་ལ་ཡི་བཞེད་པ་ལྟར། །
རྣམ་རྟོག་སྔ་ཕྱི་མེད་པར་གྲོལ་བ་ནི། །བུ་ཆུང་དག་གིས་ལྷ་ཁང་མཐོང་བ་འདྲ། །
ནམཐོང་ཙམ་ཉིད་ལས་བཟང་ངན་ཡིད་བྱེད་མེད། །རྣམ་རྟོག་གང་ཤར་རང་སར་
གྲོལ་བ་ནི། །སྦྲུལ་གྱི་མདུད་པ་ནམ་མཁར་ཞིག་པ་འདྲ། ཤར་ཙམ་ཉིད་ནས་
གཉེན་སྙིང་པོ་མེད་པར་ཞིག། །རྣམ་རྟོག་ཕན་གནོད་མེད་པར་གྲོལ་བ་ནི། །ཁང་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
Whatever abiding or moving is perceived, it is unnecessary to fabricate
anything.
Again minding and again concentrating is certainly adding deluded
thought onto itself.
Focusing directly upon bare awareness,
called "maintaining whatever arises, " is the path of all the adepts.
In the ways of applying practice to one's being, such as the middle way,
pacification and severance, !** mahamudra, and common dzogchen,
whatever thoughts arise, without making anything out of them,
you look nakedly right at them, and they become the path of liberation.
In the path of the heart-dropis esoteric instruction of dzogchen,
you look inwardly right at the one who perceives whatever thoughts arise,
and you encounter the essence of reality.
Deluded appearance and thoughts disappear in their own ground without
your paying attention to them.
I have heard several learned and accomplished gurus say
that the former is focusing outward with dualistic clinging,
while the latter is focusing inward and is truly nondualism.
Even if that is so, the methods of liberating thoughts
must include definite experiences in the three stages. :
Thus, according to Vimalamitra, '82
liberation without an initial and subsequent thought
is like a child looking around in wonderment in a temple:
there is no mental construct of good or bad made from the initial
perception.
Liberation in its own ground of whatever thought arises
is like the snake's knot disappearing in space:
as soon as it appears, it disappears without need of a remedy.
Liberation in thoughts, being neither helpful nor harmful,
is like a burglar raiding an empty house:
whether it occurs or not, there is neither loss nor gain.
In short, the essential meaning is this: understand the essential points of
meditation;
do not fall under the power of mediocrity in external manners;



Creation & Completion
སྟོང་ནང་དུ་རྐུན་མ་ཕྱིན་པ་འདྲ། །བྱུང་དང་མ་བྱུང་གཉིས་ཀ་ཐོབ་ཤོར་མེད།
༈ །གནད་དོན་བསྡུ་ན་ཉམས་ལེན་གནད་ཤེས་ནས། །ཕྱི་ཚུལ་ཐ་མལ་དབང་དུ་མི་
གཏོང་བཞིན། །ནང་གི་འབད་རྩོལ་ཇི་ཙམ་གློད་ཆོག་པ། །བརྟན་པ་ཐོབ་པའི་རྟགས་
སུ་མཁྱེན་པར་མཛོད། །སྒོམ་མེད་ཟེར་བའང་འབད་རྩོལ་ཟད་པ་ཡིན། །གནས་
ལུགས་བསྒོམ་རྒྱུ་མེད་ཀྱང་གོམས་རྒྱུ་ཡོད། །གོམས་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་ཟ་ཉལ་འགྲོ་སྡོད་
སོགས། །སྤྱོད་ལམ་ཀུན་ལ་ཡེངས་དབང་མི་བཏང་གཅེས། ༈ །གཅིག་པུར་
གནས་ཚེ་ལྷོད་ཅིང་རང་ངོ་སྐྱོང་། །མང་པོ་ཚོགས་ཚེ་དྲན་རིག་གསལ་པོར་
འདོན། །དྲན་རིག་ངོ་བོ་ཅི་ཡང་མ་གྲུབ་པས། །གཏད་སོ་མེད་ཀྱང་རང་ཚུགས་
འཛིན་རྒྱུ་ཡོད། །རིག་སྟོང་ཡིན་པས་ཚོད་ཚེ་འཛིན་ཅུང་ཟད་དཀའ། །དཀའ་ཡང་
གོམས་ན་ངོ་ཤེས་འཕྲད་ལྟར་འོང་། །སྣང་གྲགས་རྟོག་གསུམ་སྣ་ཚོགས་ཅི་ཤར་
ཡང་། །ཁོ་ཡི་རྣམ་འགྱུར་ཉིད་ལས་རྡུལ་ཙམ་མེད། ༈ །ཐུན་མིན་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་གའི་
མན་ངག་ལས། །སེམས་དང་རིག་པའི་ཤན་འབྱེད་ཅེས་གསུངས་པ། །དྲན་པས་
འོད་གསལ་རང་ངོ་མི་ཟིན་པས། །རྙོགས་པའི་ཆ་ཡོད་འགྱུ་དྲན་ཆོད་དཀའ་
སེམས། །ཤེས་པའི་ཡུལ་ཆོས་མེད་འོད་གསལ་རང་ངོ་མཐོང་། །དྭངས་ཆ་མར་མེ་
ལྟར་གནས་ཕྱི་མ་སྟེ། །སྔངས་སྐྲག་ལྟ་བུས་ཡུལ་མེད་ལམ་ལམ་པ། །འཆར་ཚེ་དེ་
ངོས་བཟུང་བས་ངེས་ཤེས་སྐྱེ། །རིག་པའི་འགྱུ་སྟོང་སྐྱེ་མེད་གྲོལ་ཅེས་གསུངས། །
དཔེ་མཐོང་སྟོང་སྐད་མ་ཡིན་བླ་མ་ཡི། །ཞལ་ནས་བརྒྱུད་པའི་གདམས་པ་སྙིང་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
and inwardly, exert effort tempered just right.
These should be understood as the signs of obtaining stability.
Nonmeditation is the exhaustion of effort.
Although there is nothing to meditate on, there is something to get
used to.is
For the sake of habituation, while eating, resting, going, or staying,
in all activities, it is crucial not to give in to distraction.
When alone, you can relax and maintain true nature.
When in a crowd, the powers of mindfulness, awareness, and clarity need
to be carefully guarded.
Since mindful awareness in essence has no true existence,
there is nothing to attend to, but there is something to establish.
Since it is awareness-emptiness, it is somewhat difficult to establish,
but once you are used to it, it will be like meeting an old acquaintance.
Whatever appearances, sounds, or thoughts occur,
there is not one iota that is not an aspect of awareness itself.
The esoteric instructions of exceptional atiyoga's speak of
the distinction between mind and intrinsic awareness.
Mindfulness cannot grasp the nature of clear light--
this abstruse aspect, with movement and memory, that is difficult to cut
through, is mind.
With no object of cognizance, the nature of clear light is seen
this radiant aspect that abides like a candle is the latter.
It is like a sudden fright without a known object,
but when it is recognized, confidence is established.
It is said that awareness is empty of movement, unborn, and liberated.
These are not just the words of emptiness seen in books.
They are the direct oral precepts of the lineage gurus that are like the
heart's blood.
They are not revealed to those of broken commitment, sophists,
and so on-
the protectorsis of mantra keep a sharp watch!
Uncontrived reality does not need to be sustained continuously:



Creation du Completion
ཁྲག་འདྲ། །དམ་ཉམས་ཁ་ཁྱེར་ཕྱིར་སོགས་ལ་མི་སྟོན་པ། །སྔགས་ཀྱི་སྲུང་མས་
བྱ་ར་ལྷུང་ལྷུང་ཡོད། །ཆོས་ཉིད་མ་བཅོས་པ་ལ་རྟག་ཏུ་ནི། །ཏུ་རེ་མི་དགོས་ཕོག་
ལོག་ཅིག་དྲན་པ་ཡིས། །ཆོག་ཅེས་བཀའ་བརྒྱུད་གོང་མའི་ཞལ་ནས་གསུངས། །
ངོ་བོ་བསྒོམ་པས་བསྐལ་མང་ལས་སྒྲིབ་རྣམས། །དག་ཅིང་རླུང་ཡང་དབུ་མར་རང་
བཞིན་དུ། །ཚུད་པ་ལ་སོགས་ཕན་ཡོན་བརྗོད་ལས་འདས། །རང་ངོ་ཤེས་ན་གཅིག་
ཤེས་ཀུན་གྲོལ་ཡིན། །བློ་སྟོབས་ཆུང་ཚེ་གཏན་གཏད་མེད་སྐྱོང་དཀའ་ན། །བསྐྱེད་
རིམ་སོགས་ལ་དྲན་འཛིན་རང་ཁམས་བསྟན། །གཏན་གཏད་མེད་སྐྱོང་ལ་དབྱིངས་
རིག་བསྲེས་བསྲེ་བ་ཡི། །བོགས་འདོན་དོན་ནམ་མཁའི་དཀྱིལ་དང་རྒྱ་མཚོའི་
གཏིང་། །རྩ་བ་བསྲེག་ལ་དྲན་པའི་གསལ་འདེབས་བྱ། །དེ་ཚེ་རིག་སྟོང་མཐའ་
དབུས་མེད་པར་འཆར། ༈ །སྟོང་ཉིད་ཞི་གནས་ལུང་མ་བསྟན་གསུམ་པོར། །
ནོར་དོགས་གསུངས་པས་དང་པོར་སྟོང་ཉིད་ནི། །ཡོད་མེད་སྐྱེ་འགག་རྟག་ཆད་
མཐའ་བྲལ་དོན། །དམིགས་བསམ་བརྗོད་བྲལ་རིག་ཐོག་མྱོང་ལ་ཟེར། ༈ །ཞི་
གནས་རྣམ་རྟོག་འཚུབ་མ་རབ་ཞི་ནས། །མཐའ་དབུས་མེད་པར་འབྲང་ཤེས་པ་ཁོད་
ཆགས་པ། །རླབས་དང་བྲལ་བའི་རྒྱ་མཚོ་བཞིན་དུ་གནས། ༈ །ལུང་མ་བསྟན་ནི་
དྲན་རིག་ཤེད་ཉམས་ནས། །འགྱུ་བ་ཕྲ་མོའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་ཤེས་བྱས་ཏེ། །དྲན་རིག་
སླེབ་དུས་ཕྱི་བལྟས་བྱས་འདྲ་འོང་། །རྩྭ་ཕུབ་གསེབ་ཏུ་ཆུ་བླུག་མི་མངོན་པ། །རྩ་
ཕུབ་མེད་པར་སླེབ་དུས་མཐོང་དང་འདྲ། ༈ །མཉམ་བཞག་གཞག་སྐབས་སུ་ལུང་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
the initial incident recalled is sufficient.
It was taught by the previous Kagyu's masters
that by meditating on the essence, the karmic obscurations of many eons
are purified, and furthermore, the vital wind enters the central channel*57
automatically.
There are other benefits too great to speak of.
If you know your own nature, it is the knowledge of the one thing that
liberates all.
When your mental powers are weak, and maintaining without focusing on
something is difficult,
practice developing mindfulness in creation stage and other techniques that
are in keeping with your condition.
In sustaining nonfocusing, the mixing of basic space and intrinsic awareness
is enhanced by mixing the source, mind, with the center of space
or the midst of the ocean to illuminate mindfulness.
At that time, awareness-emptiness without center or circumference arises.
Three things are said to pose the danger of misunderstanding:
emptiness, calm abiding, and neutrality.
Emptiness means freedom from the extremes of existence and non-
existence, birth and cessation, eternalism and nihilism.
It is called an experience in awareness, unimaginable, inconceivable, and
ineffable.
Calm abiding is thoroughly pacifying the churning of thoughts
and resting the mind evenly, without center or circumference,
abiding like the ocean without waves.
Neutrality is when the power of mindful awareness weakens,
and you pursue the subtle mental movements.
When mindful awareness arrives, it is more like hindsight.
It is like water flowing through grass:
you see it only when it comes out the other side.
During meditation, if a state of neutrality occurs,



Creation & Completion
མ་བསྟན་བྱུང་ན། །ཐེར་ལ་འདོན་ཞེས་དྲན་རིག་གྲིམ་ཆ་བསྐྱེད། །ནག་ཐོམ་བྱུང་ན་
རླུང་རོ་བསལ་བ་དང་། །བཟླས་བརྗོད་སྐད་མཐོ་གཡོ་འགུལ་སོགས་ཀྱིས་སེལ།
༈ །ཞེ་སྡང་རྟོག་པ་ལམ་ལམ་འཆར་བའི་ཚེ། །རྗེན་པར་བལྟ་ཞིང་བཟོ་མེད་བཞག་
པ་ན། །ཕན་གནོད་མེད་པར་རང་ས་དེ་རུ་ཡལ། །དེ་ལས་གཞན་དུ་རང་བྱུང་ཡེ་
ཤེས་མེད། །བཟོ་མེད་ངང་དུ་ལམ་ལམ་འཆར་བ་དེ། །རྣམ་པ་ཞེ་སྡང་ངོ་བོ་ཡེ་
ཤེས་ཡིན། །ཞེ་སྡང་ཡལ་རྗེས་སྟོང་མདངས་ཚོལ་མི་དགོས། །སྟོང་ཞིང་དམིགས་
མེད་དེ་ལ་ཟུང་འཇུག་ཟེར། །རྡོ་རྗེ་སེམས་དཔའ་སོགས་ཀྱང་དེ་བཞིན་ནོ། །ཉོན་
མོངས་འདོད་ཆགས་སོགས་ལའང་རིགས་འགྲེ་འཚལ། ༈ །ཡང་དག་དོན་ལ་
བསྒོམ་བྱ་སྒོམ་བྱེད་མེད། །དུན་པ་གཅིག་པུས་ཆོག་ན་ཉམས་ལེན་རྩེ། །མཐར་
ཐུག་དོན་ལ་དྲན་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱང་མེད། །དྲན་གཞི་དབྱིངས་སུ་དག་ཚེ་ཡེ་ཤེས་བརྗོད། །
བུད་ཤིང་ཟད་ཚེ་མེ་ཡང་ཡལ་བ་བཞིན། །འཁྲུལ་པ་ཟད་ཚེ་གཉེན་པོ་ཉིད་ཀྱང་ཞི། །
འདི་ནི་འཕགས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ཡུལ་ལགས། ༈ །བསྒོམ་པ་མ་ཡིན་མི་བསྒོམ་
པ་ཡང་མིན། །བསྒོམ་པ་མིན་ཏེ་དམིགས་གཏད་གང་ཡང་མེད། །མི་བསྒོམ་མིན་
ཏེ་ཡོངས་སུ་བཏང་བ་མེད། །ཆོས་ཉིད་རང་ངོ་ཤེས་ཙམ་དེ་ཐོག་འཇོག །དེ་ལ་བློ་
ཡི་བསམ་བྱ་ཡོད་མིན་ཏེ། །དོན་དམ་བློ་འདས་དམིགས་མེད་ཡིན་པས་སོ། །རྣམ་
རྟོག་ཡུལ་དང་འབྲེལ་འདྲིས་མ་ཆད་ན། །མ་བཅོས་ཟེར་ཡང་འཁྲུལ་པ་བཟློག་མི་
ཐུབ། །ལྟ་མཁན་ནང་དང་བལྟ་ཡུལ་ཕྱིར་ཆད་པ། །རང་ཤར་རང་གྲོལ་ཟེར་ཡང་



The Essential Point of Creation and Completion
single it out, that is, tighten up the mindful awareness.
When dark torpor sets in, clear out the stale breath
and wake up by chanting, shouting, swaying, and so on.
When angry thoughts arise vividly,
if you look at them nakedly and rest without fabrication,
they will vanish in their own ground without harm or benefit.
Self-arising wisdom is none other than that.
That vivid arising within a state of nonfabrication
takes the form of anger but is essentially pristine wisdom.
In the wake of the vanishing anger, the radiance of emptiness need not be
pursued.
That emptiness without frame of reference is what's alled "unity,"
as are Vajrasattvals9 and the others.
Apply this also to the afflictive emotions, such as desire and so on.
In the completely perfect sense, there is no meditation and nothing to
meditate on.
When mindfulness alone is enough, it is the peak of practice.
In the ultimate sense, even mindfulness itself does not exist.
When the basis of mindfulness is absolved in basic space, we speak of wisdom.
As when fuel is used up the fire is also extinguished,
when delusion is used up the remedy itself is eliminated.
This is the sphere of activity of all noble ones.
It is not meditation, nor is it nonmeditation.
Not being meditation, there is nothing at all to focus on,
and not being nonmeditation, there can be no distraction.
Simply place the mind on the bare apprehension of the nature of reality.
This is not a thought-object of the rational mind,
because the absolute is beyond intellect and without reference point.
If the intimate connection between thought and object is not severed,
although you call it "uncontrived," it cannot reverse delusion.
Severing the inner perceiver and the external object
may be called self-arising self-liberating, but it is still duality.
When there is no antidote, it is self-arising self-liberating.



Creation
Completion
གཉིས་འཛིན་ཉིད། །གཉེན་པོ་མེད་ན་རང་ཤར་རང་གྲོལ་ཡིན། ༈ །རང་གི་
སེམས་ཉིད་མ་ལ་སྣང་པ་བུ། །ཆུ་ལས་ལ་ཆུ་བུར་བརྡོལ་བཞིན་ཞེན་པ་ལས། །སྣང་
བ་ཤར་ཡང་གཉིས་མེད་རོལ་ཤེས་ན། །སྣང་སེམས་མ་བུ་འཕྲད་ཅེས་དེ་ལ་བྱ། །
འཁོར་འདས་བཟང་ངན་རྟོགས་དང་མ་རྟོགས་ཀུན། །སྤང་བླང་མི་རྙེད་ཡེ་སྟོང་ཡེ་
རྫོགས་འགྱུར། །ལྟ་སྒོམ་སྤྱོད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དེ་ལ་འདུས། །བསྲུང་བྱའི་དམ་ཚིག་
རྣམས་ཀྱང་དེར་འདུས་པས། །དེ་ཕྱིར་རྫོགས་ཆེན་ཨ་ཏི་ཡོ་ག་ལས། །མི་བསྲུང་
བསྲུང་བའི་དམ་ཚིག་བཞིར་གསུངས་པ། །བསྲུང་མཚམས་མེད་པས་མེད་པའི་
དམ་ཚིག་ལ། །གཟུང་དང་འཛིན་པ་བྲལ་བས་ཕྱལ་པ་ཡིན། །ཐམས་ཅད་སེམས་
སུ་རྫོགས་པས་གཅིག་པུ་སྟེ། །ལྷག་མེད་དེ་ལ་རྫོགས་པས་པ་ལྷུན་གྱིས་རྫོགས། །
དུས་གསུམ་རྒྱལ་བའི་དགོངས་པའི་མཐར་ཐུག་གོ ༈ །ཐོ་རེངས་གཉིད་སད་དུས་
ཀྱང་རྨི་ལམ་ལ། །རྟོག་དཔྱོད་ལ་སོགས་རྣམ་རྟོག་བསུ་སྐྱེལ་ཀུན། །མི་བྱེད་ཉམས་
ལེན་གསལ་འདེབས་དྲན་པའི་ངང་། །བཞག་ཚེ་དེ་ཉིན་རིག་པའི་དྭངས་སྙིགས་
ཕྱེད། ༈ །སྤང་བླང་མི་ཤེས་ཆོས་ལ་མི་གུས་དང་། །བག་མེད་པ་དང་ཉོན་མོངས་
མང་བ་བཞི། འདི་བཞི་འཛོམ་ན་ཉེས་ཏེ་ལྟུང་ཆར་བཞིན་འབེབས། །ལྟུང་བ་འབྱུང་
བའི་སྒོ་བཞི་ཕྱེས་པ་འདྲ། །དྲན་ཤེས་བག་ཡོད་ཉིད་དང་མ་བྲལ་ན། །ཉོན་མོངས་
རྣམས་ཀྱང་ཡེ་ཤེས་ཆེན་པོར་འགྱུར། །གཞན་ཀུན་དགེ་བར་འགྱུར་པ་སྨོས་ཅི་
དགོས། །ལམ་ཁྱེར་གནད་ཀུན་དྲན་པའི་ལག་ཏུ་ཡོད། །དྲན་པ་མེད་ན་ལམ་ཁྱེར་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
One's very own mind is the child appearing to the mother.
Like bubbles rising out of water, appearances arise out of attachment,
and yet if you know that it is the play of nonduality,
then this is what is meant by appearance and mind being the meeting of
mother and child.
You won't find acceptance or rejection of cyclic existence and transcen-
dence, good and bad, realized and unrealized-
emptiness and completion were always present.
All view, meditation, and action is included in that,
and since all the commitments to preserve are also included in that,
the dzogchen atiyoga teaches
four commitments is to preserve that are kept by not preserving.
Being without interruption in preservation is the commitment of non-
existence,"
being free of duality is "evenness,"
everything being perfect in mind is "singularity,"
and this completion in itself without anything else is "spontaneously
perfect."
This is the ultimate intention of the victorious ones of the three times.
Don't bother with examination of dreams when awakening at dawn
and all the other methods of welcoming discursive thinking.
Resting within mindfulness during illuminated practice,
the brilliance and murkiness of today's awareness will separate out.
Not understanding rejection and acceptance; lack of devotion in Dharma,
careless, compulsive behavior, and excessive afflictive emotion-
if these four are present, faults and downfalls will fall like rain.
It is as if the four trapdoors to downfalls are wide open.
But if you maintain cautious mindful awareness,
even the afflictive emotions will turn into great wisdom;
what need to mention that all else becomes virtue?
All the essential points of daily-life applications:61 are held by mindfulness.
Without mindfulness, you won't even remember these applications,
and their mere existence is of no benefit whatsoever.
You must proceed directly with a direct attitude.



Creation
Completion
མི་དྲན་པས། །ཡིན་པ་ཙམ་གྱིས་ཕན་ཐོགས་ཅི་ཡང་མེད། །ཐད་ཀ་ཐད་ཀའི་འདུ་
ཤེས་རྩིས་ཟིན་དགོས། །སྤྱོད་ལམ་ཀུན་ལ་བག་ཡོད་བསྟེན་པ་ནི། །ཐུབ་དབང་ཉིད་
དང་འབྲལ་མེད་འགྲོགས་པ་འདྲ། །བཟའ་བཏུང་ཨོཾ་ཨཱ་ཧཱུྃ་གིས་བདུད་རྩིར་
སྦྱངས། །རྡོ་ཡི་གོང་དུ་དཀོན་མཆོག་རྗེས་དྲན་པའི། །མདོ་ཡི་ཚིག་གི་ནི་རྒྱས་
བསྡུས་གང་རུང་བཏོན། །རང་ལུས་ལྷར་གསལ་སྤྱི་མགྲིན་སྙིང་ག་རུ། །ཁྲོ་བོ་རིག་
འཛིན་ཞི་བ་རིགས་བརྒྱའི་ལྷ། །གཙོ་བོ་རྩ་བའི་བླ་མ་དབྱེར་མེད་བསྒོམ། །བ་སྤུའི་
བུ་གང་རིག་འཛིན་མཁའ་འགྲོ་སོགས། །ཏིལ་གོང་ཁ་ཕྱེས་བཞིན་དུ་བཞུགས་མོས་
ལ། །དུན་ངང་ཤེས་བཞིན་ཆགས་སེམས་ཞེན་མེད་པར་སྤྱད། །བཟའ་བཏུང་ཐ་
མལ་མཐོང་ཡང་སྐྱོན་མེད་དེ། །ཅི་ཟོས་ཚོགས་ཀྱི་འཁོར་ལོར་འགྱུར་པ་ཡིན། །
ལམ་ཁྱེར་གཞན་ལ་བླ་མའི་རྣལ་འབྱོར་དང་། །བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་སྤྱོད་སྦྱོངས་བསྐྱེད་
རིམ་རྫོགས་རིམ་སོགས། །གང་འདོད་བསྒོམ་པ་བླ་མའི་ཞལ་ལས་ལོངས།
༈ །འདུས་བྱས་མི་རྟག་ཟག་བཅས་སྡུག་བསྔལ་བ། །མྱང་འདས་ཆོས་རྣམས་ཞི་
བ་སྟོང་པ་ཉིད། །འདི་བཞི་ལྟ་བ་བཀའ་རྟགས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ལགས། །ཛམ་ལྷར་གཏོར་
མ་འཕྲོག་མར་ཆང་བུ་དང་། །འཇུར་གེགས་ཁ་འབར་མ་ལ་ཆུ་སྦྱིན་ཏེ། །བཞི་འདི་
སྤྱོད་པ་བཀའ་རྟགས་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་ལགས། །ལྟ་སྤྱོད་ཕྱག་རྒྱ་བརྒྱད་པོ་འདི་འཛིན་ན། །
རྒྱལ་བའི་རྗེས་འཇུག་ཡིན་ལ་མི་འཛིན་དེ། །ཁོང་གི་སློབ་མ་མིན་ཞེས་ཐུབ་པས་
གསུངས། །བོད་ཁམས་སྐྱབས་པའི་མགོན་པོ་ཨོ་རྒྱན་ཡིན། །རྣམ་ཐར་བཀའ་དྲིན་



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
Relying on cautious attention in all activities
is like having Shakyamuni himself as your constant companion.
Consecrate food and drink as nectar with OM AH HUNG,162
and before lunch recite the brief or extensive verses of
The Sutra of Recalling the Jewels.163
Imagine your own body as a deity, and in the crown, throat, and heart
centers,
the hundred wrathful deities, knowledge-holders, and peaceful deities, 164
and meditate mainly on inseparability with your source guru.
Imagining your pores filled with knowledge-holders, dakinis, 16 and so on,
like a bursting bag of sesame seeds;
in a state of deliberate mindfulness, partake without attachment.
It doesn't matter if you see it as ordinary food and drink;
whatever you eat will become a sacred feast. 166
Other applications for daily living are guru yoga, 167
bodhisattva activities, 168 creation and completion stage practices, and so on.
You can receive whatever meditation you desire from your guru.
All that is composite is impermanent, all that is corrupt is suffering,
transcending misery, all phenomena are peace and emptiness-
these are the four seals that distinguish the genuine Buddhist view. 189
Offering food cakes!70 to Jambhala, 17 a pinch of food to the Plunderer, in
and water to the Constricted Throat and Blazing Mouth spirits 73_-
these are the four seals that distinguish genuine Buddhist activity.
If you uphold these eight seals of view and action,
you are a follower of the victorious ones, but if not,
you are not a disciple-chis was taught by Shakyamuni.
The lord of refuge in Tibet and Kham' is Orgyen."
Remembering his kindness and life example, supplicate him.
Tibet's deity of good fortune is the Great Compassionate One. 176
Diligently recite the six-syllable mantra."
The profound essential points for wisdom to arise naturally are these:



Creation • Completion
དྲན་པས་གསོལ་འདེབས་འཚལ། །བོད་ཀྱི་ལྷ་སྐལ་ཐུགས་རྗེ་ཆེན་པོ་ཡིན། །
བཟླས་པ་ཡིག་དྲུག་ཉད་གཉིས་ལ་འབད་པར་འཚལ། ༈ །ཡེ་ཤེས་རང་ཤར་འགྲོ་
བའི་གནད་ཟབ་ནི། །གཟུང་འཛིན་རླུང་རྣམས་རང་བཞིན་དག་པའི་ཕྱིར། །འབད་
རྩོལ་མེད་པར་བར་གྱི་རླུང་སྦྱོར་དགང་། །ཅིར་སྣང་ཡེ་ཤེས་འཆར་བའི་སྒོ་ཡིན་
ཕྱིར། །ཀ་ཏི་ཤེལ་གྱི་རྩ་ཆེན་ནམ་མཁར་ཕྱེ། །གང་ཤར་གཏད་མེད་ངང་དུ་གྲོལ་
བའི་ཕྱིར། །རང་སེམས་སྙིང་པོ་ཡི་གེ་ཧཱུྃ་ལ་གཏད། །གནད་ཀྱི་ཁྱད་པར་དེ་གསུམ་
དང་ལྡན་ན། །དཀའ་བ་མེད་པར་གདོད་མའི་རྒྱལ་སར་གཤེགས། ༈ །གཞན་
ཡང་ནངས་སྔ་ལངས་མ་ཐག་པའི་ཚེ། །རླུང་རོ་གསལ་ནས་འབྱུང་གནས་འཇུག་པ་
གསུམ། །དཾ་ཨཱ་ཨོཾ་སྦྱར་ཉེར་གཅིག་བརྒྱ་སོགས་བསླང་། །ཉིན་པར་རླུང་རྣམས་
དེ་བཞིན་ཡིན་པར་མོས། །ཉལ་ཁར་འབྱུང་འཇུག་གནས་གསུམ་འབྲུ་གསུམ་
སྦྱར། །མཚན་གྱིས་གྱི་དབུགས་རྣམས་དེ་བཞིན་ཡིན་པར་མོས། །དེས་ནི་ཉི་ཁྲི་ཆིག་
སྟོང་དྲུག་བརྒྱའི་རླུང་། །སྔགས་འགྱུར་དཀའ་བ་མེད་པར་ལྷ་བསྙན་ཐེམ།
༈ །ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ་མཉམ་མེད་དྭགས་པོ་ཡིས། །ངོ་བོ་མཐོང་ནས་འཇམ་རླུང་
ཅུང་ཟད་རེ། །བཟུང་ཞིང་ཡིད་བཟླས་ཟབ་མོར་མི་ཚེ་དྲིལ། །སྐབས་སུ་བླ་མར་
གསོལ་གདབ་ཐུགས་ཡིད་བསྲེ། །དེ་ལས་གཞན་པའི་ཟབ་ལམ་མེད་པར་
གསུངས། ༈ ། ཉལ་དུས་སྤྱི་བོའི་བླམ་སྙིང་དབུས་དྲངས། །དྲན་རྟོག་འཕྲོ་འདུ་
བསམ་བློ་ཀུན་སྤངས་ཏེ། །མོས་གུས་གསོལ་བཏབ་ཡེངས་མེད་ངང་དུ་གློད། །



The Essential Point of Creation and Completion
Since the vital winds of duality are naturally pure,
effortlessly hold the intermediate wind. 17
Since whatever appears is the door to the arising of wisdom,
open the great crystal kati channelito the sky.
Since whatever arises is liberated without focusing on it,
focus on the letter HUNG as the essence of one's mind.
If you possess these three special essencial points,
you will easily arrive at the primordial place of the victorious ones.
Additionally, in the morning as soon as you rise,
having cleared away the stale breath, apply HUNG AH OM
to the exhaling, pausing, and inhaling, counting twenty-one or a
hundred times.
Imagine that all your breathing during the day is like that.
When going to sleep, apply the three letters to exhaling, inhaling,
and pausing,
and imagine that all your breathing during the night is like that.
By doing this, your daily 21,600 breaths become mantra
and the deity's recitation requirement is fulfilled without hardship. 186
The king of Dharma, the unsurpassable Dagpo,
said that there is no more profound approach than
looking at the essence and holding a few “gentle” breaths
while doing profound mental recitation, thus incorporating it with
human life,
and occasionally praying to the guru and blending your minds.
When retiring to sleep, draw the guru from above your head into the
center of your heart,
abandon the coming and going of thoughts, memories, and all mental
activity,
and relax into a state of undistracted devotion and prayer.
Then the clear light will gradually arise out of deep sleep.102
If you want to do the meditation of recognizing, changing, expanding, and
purifying dreams, 183



Creation
Completion
སྲབ་འཐུག་འོད་གསལ་རིམ་བཞིན་འཆར་བར་འགྱུར། ༈ །རྨི་ལམ་འཛིན་བསྒྱུར་
སྤེལ་སྦྱང་སྒོམ་འདོད་ན། །ཉིན་མོའི་སྣང་བ་ཐམས་ཅད་རྨི་ལམ་གྱི། །འདུན་པས་
ཟིན་ན་རྨི་ལམ་འབྱང་བ་སླ། །ཉིན་སྣང་ཨ་འཐས་དབང་བཏང་མཚན་མོ་ལ། །རྨི་
ལམ་འཛིན་མོད་ལག་ཏུ་ལོན་པ་དཀའ། །དེ་ཡང་བར་དོ་ཆོད་པར་བྱེད་པ་ལ། །རྨི་
ལམ་ཆོད་དགོས་དེ་ལ་ཉིན་སྣང་ཀུན། །སྒྱུ་མ་རྨི་ལམ་ལྟ་བུར་མ་རྟོགས་ན། །
འཁྲུལ་པ་རྒྱ་འབྱམས་གཅིག་གིས་གཅིག་ལ་སྒྲིབ་བསྒྲིབ། ༈ སྤྱིར་ནི་འཆི་བ་མི་
རྟག་བྱམས་སྙིང་རྗེ། །མོས་གུས་བསྐྱེད་རིམ་རྨི་ལམ་སྒྱུ་ལུས་དང་། །བ ་དོ་ལ་
སོགས་གོམས་འདྲིས་དགོས་ཚད་ཀུན། །སྤྱོད་ལམ་རྣམ་བཞིར་མི་བརྗེད་གསལ་
འདེབས་བྱ། །མྱུར་དུ་འབྱོར་ཞིང་རྒྱུད་ལ་སྐྱེ་བར་འགྱུར། །བདག་འདྲ་སྙིང་ནས་
ཆོས་སྒྲུབ་མ་དྲན་པས། རང་རྒྱུད་ཆོས་དང་འདྲེ་བར་མི་འདུག་ཀྱང་། །སྔོན་
བསགས་རྣམ་དཀར་ལས་ཀྱི་འཕྲོ་བཟང་པོས། །སངས་རྒྱས་བསྟན་ལ་སྙིང་ནས་
དད་པའི་ཕྱིར། །འདི་ཙམ་གྱིས་ཀྱང་གཞན་ལ་ཕན་པའི་བློས། །རྒྱུར་བྱས་བཅས་
བསླབ་གསུམ་རྣམ་དག་དགེ་བའི་བཤེས། །ཤི་མཱན་ཞེས་བྱས་གསུང་བསྐུལ་རྐྱེན་
བྱས་ཏེ། །རང་ལ་མེད་པར་ནེ་ཙོའི་ཆོས་སྐད་བཞིན། །བྲིས་པའི་དགེ་རྩས་དཔལ་
ལྡན་ཀརྨ་པ། །ཡབ་སྲས་བརྒྱུད་པར་བཅས་པའི་ཞབས་བརྟན་ཅིང་། །མཛད་ཕྲིན་
འཕེལ་དེས་མཁའ་ཁྱབ་སེམས་ཅན་རྣམས། །ཚེ་གཅིག་རྡོ་རྗེ་འཆ བདངོས་འགྲུབ་
གྱུར་ཅིག །



The Essential Point of Creation and Completion
you must maintain an attitude during the day that all appearances are dreams,
and then it will be easy to deal with dreams.
If you tend to solidify appearances during the day,
then at night, even if you recognize dreams, the practice will be difficult.
Also, to cut through the intermediate existence
you need to have cut through the dream experience.
If you don't realize that all waking appearances are like dreams or illusions,
then one vast mass of delusion will obscure another.
In general, impermanence, love and compassion,
devotion, creation stage, dream yoga, illusory body yoga,
intermediate existence yoga, and so on; all those practices that require
habituation,
should be conscientiously applied during the four daily activities. 103
Quickly assimilating them, they will become part of your being.
Someone like me who cannot remember to practice Dharma sincerely
has not mixed the Dharma with his being.
However, due to the good influence of previously accumulated
virtuous karma,
I do have sincere faith in the teachings of the Buddha,
and with just this I have the intention to benefit others.
This is the primary cause [for this composition), and the secondary cause
was the encouragement of the spiritual friend Shrimen, who perfectly
possesses the three trainings. Tas
I wrote it not through my own gifts, but rather like a parrot mimicking
Dharma talk
May the roots of this virtue render service to the glorious Karmapala?
and the lineage of gurus and disciples.
May the expansion of their enlightened activities bring all beings
throughout space
to the mastery of the state of Vajradhara in a single lifetime.



Creation Completion
ཞེས་པའང་རྒྱལ་དབང་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པ་བཅུ་བཞི་པའི་ཞབས་གྲས་ཀྱི་དགེ་བའི་
བཤེས་གཉེན་ངེས་དོན་ལ་ཐུགས་ཤིན་ཏུ་གཞོལ་བ་ཀརྨ་དཔལ་ལྡན་ནས་གསུང་
བསྐུལ་གནང་བ་ལྟར། ཤཱཀྱའི་དགེ་སྦྱོང་རྟགས་ཙམ་འཛིན་པ་ཀརྨ་ངག་དབང་ཡོན་
ཏན་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཞེས་པས་རང་ལོ་ཉེར་བདུན་པར་སྨྲས་རིམ་བཞིན་དུ་བསྐུལ་བ་པོ་ཉིད་
ཀྱིས་བྲིས་པ་འདིས་ཀྱང་བསྟན་འགྲོ་ལ་སྨན་པའི་དཔལ་ཡོན་འབྱུང་བར་གྱུར་ཅིག
།སརྦ་ཀཱ་ལ་དིཤི་ཡཾ་སི་སྤོ་ཊ་བྷབནྟུ།། བཀྲིས་དཔལ་འབར་འཛམ་གླིང་རྒྱན་དུ་
ཤོག།། །།དགེའོ།། །།དགེའོ།།
do



The Essential Points of Creation and Completion
COLOPHON
At the request of the spiritual friend Karma Palden, an attendant of the
fourteenth Omniscient Lord of the Victorious Ones (Karmapa), and whose
mind is totally devoted to the definitive meaning, I, Karma Ngawang
Yönten Gyamtso, la bearing merely the signs of a Buddhist monk, at the
age of twenty-seven, gradually dictated this text, and he transcribed it. May
it send forth glorious healing qualities for the doctrine and for beings. In
all times and directions may glory prevail. May the glorious blaze of good
fortune adorn the world. Virtue! Virtue!



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Introduction
In this essay, I will discuss the creation (or generation) and completion
stages according to the text The Essence of Creation and Completion, which
was composed by Jamgön Kongtrul the Great. In particular, between the
two topics, the creation stage and the completion stage, we will be con-
cerned primarily with the creation stage. Although in a sense our main
practice is the completion stage, the practice of the completion stage
depends entirely upon the stability and blessing of the creation stage, just
as for example the practice of vipashyana, or insight, depends upon the
attainment of stable shamata, or concentration.
This is a very appropriate topic for study. It is easy to talk about shamata
and vipashyana and to listen to explanations of mahamudra or explanations
concerned only with the completion stage. However, it is important not to
choose the topic that sounds good, but instead to choose the one that will be
of the most practical benefit, that will actually enable students to progress in
their practice of meditation. Therefore, it is appropriate to address subjects
that are more difficult to understand, because it is these, especially, that need
the most complete explanation.
When you examine your mind, some impurities you might discover in
your motivation for study and practice are competitiveness, arrogance,
and selfishness. In a sense, an impure motivation is not a serious problem,
but at the same time, it is necessary to let go of it and replace it with a
pure motivation. A pure motivation is the motivation of wishing to study
and practice in order to be able to benefit both yourself and others. Given
that normally we are mostly concerned with benefiting only ourselves, it is



Creation
Completion
especially important to emphasize the wish to benefit others. Even when
we wish to benefit others, we tend to restrict that wish to a few others,
such as our family and friends. The wish to benefit a few others is not an
impure motivation--it is pure—but among pure motivations it is a fairly
minimal one. Here we are trying to develop the motivation of practicing
and studying in order to benefit all beings who fill space, since all beings,
without exception, equally wish to be happy and free from suffering, and
yer lack the knowledge necessary to enable them to achieve these goals. So
if you have the motivation for both study and practice in that you are
doing it in order to establish all beings without exception in a state of hap-
piness, this motivation is not only pure but also vast in scope.
Essential Points for Approaching the Path
Our text begins by explaining eight essential points for approaching the
path: gaining certainty in the Dharma; renunciation; understanding what
Dharma is (view, meditation, conduct, and fruition); defining creation and
completion; faith and devotion; pure vision; the two truths; and under-
standing the qualities of the path.
GAINING CERTAINTY
The first point is that, in order to practice Dharma, you need to be certain
about its validity. Cultivating that certainty has to be done in three steps:
cultivating the wisdom or knowledge of hearing, cultivating the wisdom of
thinking about what has been heard, and then finally cultivating the wis-
dom that comes from meditation. It is pointed out that people of the high-
est faculties, which means extremely rare and highly gifted individuals, do
not necessarily need to go through the preliminary stages of hearing and
thinking about the Dharma. An example of this type of person is King
Indrabhuti of Uddiyana, who received instruction from the Buddha and
was liberated on the spot. Most of us, however, need first to hear instruc-
tion, then to think about it very carefully, and only thereafter to imple-
ment it in meditation practice.
Why do we have to begin by hearing the Dharma? Because Dharma
practice is not primarily concerned with or limited to the experiences of this



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
life. Therefore, it is sufficiently different from what we are used to that
before we have heard it explained, we really have no idea what it is, let alone
how to go about practicing it. We therefore require instruction. What do
we cake as the sources of our instruction? What Dharma do we try to hear?
Generally speaking, there are two classes of scripture or texts used in
Buddhadharma. One is called "the dictates of the Buddha," which means
the teachings that the Buddha gave when he taught in India. The others are
called the commentaries," or shastras, which are commentaries on these
teachings composed by the great masters of India and other countries.
The custom in the Vajrayana tradition is to emphasize the study of the
commentaries rather than the study of the Buddha's original teachings.
Casually considering this, you might expect that we would emphasize the
Buddha's teachings themselves in our study because, after all, is not the
Buddha the most important teacher in the Buddhist tradition? Historically
some scholars also have objected, saying, "Why study the commentaries
rather than the Buddha's original statements?" The reason is that the
Buddha's original statements are vast in extent and number. Furthermore,
they are not necessarily organized for easy study or reference; they are orga-
nized on the basis of the occasions on which they were delivered. In addi-
tion, because these teachings given by the Buddha were made at the
request of and for the needs of specific individuals in specific contexts, they
represent different styles of teaching
The Buddha's teachings are principally classed as either provisional or
definitive in meaning. Simply by studying these original texts themselves, it
is impossible for a beginner to determine which statements are provisional
and which are definitive. On the other hand, the commentaries distinguish
clearly between provisional and definitive statements of the Buddha; for
easy reference, they assemble similar teachings or those that need to be
used together; they explain the hidden meanings or subtleties the Buddha's
teachings; and they summarize especially long treatments of topics that can
be understood with a briefer explanation. In short, it is really through the
commentaries that we approach the Buddha's teachings themselves.
Within the commentaries on the Buddha's teachings there are two
main types. Some are elaborate explanations employing a great deal of
logical reasoning that are intended as guides for acquiring tremendous
knowledge of the teachings. The other commentaries do not have elaborate
85



Creation
Completion
presentations of logical reasoning but are fairly straightforward guides on
how to practice the Buddha's teachings. These tend to include references
to the Buddha's statements and also refer a great deal to the actual experi-
ences discussed in those texts with practical instructions. It is principally
these that we emphasize in our study.
Within the general class of texts that give practical instructions, again
there are two varieties. Some of these texts are elaborate explanations of the
methods of practice, and some are very brief, very pithy statements on the
essence of practice. The latter tend to be in the form of songs and are
referred to in Sanskrit as doha. They are the most important type of texts
to emphasize in your study, because, given their form, they are easy to
remember. Being easy to keep in mind, they are easy to use in actual prac-
tice. They combine the two virtues of profundity and brevity. Among the
Indian dohas, we study those of the Indian mahasiddhas such as Tilopa
and Naropa. Among the Tibetan songs, we study those of the masters of
the Kagyu lineage, especially those of Jetsun Milarepa. Whether you read
them or hear them, they are the most important basis for study.
Through hearing the Dharma, you come to a very basic idea or under-
standing of what it means. You come to think, “Things are like this, this is
how things are." This understanding is the first level of prajna, or knowl-
edgeknowledge that comes from hearing. But it is only the first level. In
general there are two kinds of practitioners. One kind is called a “follower
of faith,” which means someone who basically believes what they are told
simply because they have been told it. The other kind is a "follower of
Dharma," or someone who does not take anything on authority, no matter
who was supposed to have said it, but tries to discern why they said it,
what it really means. Taking this second approach-looking for the real
meaning of a statement--you go beyond the knowledge of hearing.
Whether you study the Buddha's teachings or the commentaries upon
them, the texts of instruction or the dohas, you are concerned with the
question, "What does this really mean? What is this really trying to say to
me? Why did the person who wrote or sang this express it in this way?"
Through that type of analysis, you generate much greater certainty and
understanding than you would by simply taking the statement at face
value. This greater certainty is called the “knowledge (prajna) of think-
ing." If you meditate after having generated this knowledge of thinking,
86



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
then your practice will go much better, because you will actually know
how to medicate. You will also understand why you are medicating, why it
is beneficial, and why it will work, which will give you much more confi-
dence to go on with the practice. It is principally for this reason that the
practice of meditation needs to be preceded by the practice of hearing and
thinking.
RENUNCIATION
The next topic our text deals with is the importance of renunciation.
There are two vital things that you need at the very inception of your
practice. One is trust in Dharma, in its validity. The other is renuncia-
tion-revulsion for samsara. In order to create these, in order to generate
true certainty about Dharma and revulsion for samsara, it is necessary to
begin by contemplating what are called "the four thoughts that turn the
mind," or the four reminders. They are the difficulty of acquiring the free-
dom and resources of a precious human life; death and impermanence;
the results of actions; and the defects of samsara. The generation of this
type of renunciation and certainty in the Dharma is what is called “your
mind going to the Dharma."
UNDERSTANDING WHAT DHARMA Is
The next step in your practice is to come to an understanding of what
Dharma is, an understanding of the topics of view, meditation, conduct,
and fruition that make up Buddhadharma. The root of all of these, as the
Buddha himself said, is taming the mind. The Buddha's 84,000 teachings
are concerned with taming the 84,000 types of mental afflictions, or kle-
shas. Taming the mind means taming the kleshas, because your mind is
sometimes very rough, very wild, full of selfishness, afflicted by all kinds of
coarse and negative thoughts. Whether or not we succeed in taming our
minds, this taming is the topic with which all Dharma is concerned.
Everything depends upon your mind. Any qualities that you attain
through the path, you attain through your mind. Any defects that you
remove through the path are removed from your mind. Therefore, what is
called "the recognition or realization of the view" is taming your mind.
What is called "the cultivation of meditative absorption" or "medication is
taming your mind. You engage in certain modes of behavior of body and



Creation
Completion
speech-conduct-in order to tame your mind. Taming is the fruition, or
result, of your practice. If you understand this, then you understand that
view, meditation, conduct, and fruition are all founded upon the mind.
According to Buddhadharma, a person consists of the three faculties of
body, speech, and mind. How do we think about these? The body is com-
posed of physical substances such as flesh and blood. What we regard as
our body, from the top of the head to the tip of the toes, seems very pow-
erful, very real. Speech seems much less substantial. Speech consists of all
of the positive and negative things that we say. But the root of all of the
deeds of body and speech is our mind. Now, if you were asked to say
which of these three-body, speech, or mind—is primary, you might say
the body because the body seems the strongest, the most active or effective.
Then you might say that speech is second because speech, after all, can
communicate. Nevertheless, it is not as strong or as stable as the body. And
mind seems the weakest because it doesn't achieve anything except to
think. However, in fact mind is in charge of body and speech. Body and
speech don't do anything at all without mind telling them to do it. So
mind is the root. It is therefore said by the siddhas of our tradition that
your body and speech are like servants who perform the virtue and wrong-
doing that the mind, like a boss, instigates. So, of these three, mind is in
fact the most powerful. Therefore, it is of the greatest importance that we
take hold of our mind, that we fix our mind. Hence all Buddhist practices,
including view, meditation, and conduct, are concerned with fixing or
taming the mind.
Taming or fixing the mind means abandoning the kleshas, the mental
afflictions. Everyone's mind has two aspects, one pure and the other
impure, and the impure aspect is called klesha. If you abandon kleshas,
then all of your actions of body and speech will automatically become
Dharmic or pure. As long as you have not abandoned them, then no mat-
ter how good your actions of body and speech may appear, you will still
never be happy. Abandoning kleshas is the aim of Dharma, but for this to
succeed, it is necessary that the remedy, the practice, actually encounter
the kleshas. In order for this to occur, you need to take an honest look at
your own mind. You need to see which klesha is your biggest problem. For
some people, it is anger; for others it is jealousy, or attachment, or bewil-
derment, or pride. It can be any one of the five main kleshas, which are



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
usually called the five poisons. (In fact, it is in order to tame these that wis-
dom deities manifest as the buddhas of the five families.)
When you have discovered which klesha is the strongest, you dedicate
your practice to its amelioration. For example, if you are medicating on
the four reminders, such as the difficulty of acquiring a precious human
existence, you think, "I am doing the meditation in order to abandon
such and such klesha." Or if you are practicing the uncommon prelimi-
naries, such as the refuge and bodhichitta practice, the Vajrasattva practice,
mandala practice, or guru yoga, then you think, "I am doing this in order
to tame this klesha that afflicts my mind.” This is especially effective in
the Vajrasattva practice, wherein you can visualize the ambrosia coming
from his heart and entering the top of your head to purify you and think:
"Such and such klesha is being purified.” Thus, by specifically directing
the intention of your practice to your biggest problem, the Dharma
becomes an effective remedy for your kleshas, and your kleshas will
weaken over time.
Some people do not have any particularly dominant klesha and are not
particularly involved with anything overtly unvirtuous. They are more
afflicted by a basic fundamental fixation on their own existence. Or they
might be afflicted by doubt and hesitation. They might always wonder
whether such and such is like this, or like that." Or they might be afflicted
by meaningless regret, constantly questioning their own actions. Or they
might be mostly afflicted by a state of neutral sleepiness, or simply by the
presence of a great many thoughts that aren't particularly kleshas or nega-
tive in themselves. If any of these is your principal problem, then direct
your practice to that. Dedicate all of your practice, whether it is the visual-
ization of deities, the recitation of mantras, or the practice of meditation,
to the eradication of that problem. Directing your practice in this focused
way will weaken and eventually eradicate the problem.
DEFINING CREATION AND COMPLETION
The next topic addressed in the text is a definition of the creation stage
and the completion stage, which, in effect, distinguishes between them.
The term "creation" or "creation stage” refers to the creation of some-
thing, the generation or origination of something. "Completion” refers in
general to carrying that which has been generated to its completion, or to



Creation
Completion
its perfection. In practice, creation stage refers to the visualization of the
deities, including radiating and gathering light rays, the visualization and
recitation of mantras, and so forth. Completion stage refers to the dissolu-
tion of such visualizations into emptiness.
However, in another sense, the meaning of the term creation is "some-
thing that is fabricated." In creation-stage practice you think that things
are such and such, that "things are like this." The completion stage, by
contrast, refers to something that is natural or unfabricated, because in the
completion stage, rather than thinking that things are like such and such,
you discover them as they are. However, the statement that the creation
stage is the cultivation of some kind of fabrication, as true as it is, is really
only true of the beginning of creation-stage practice. Nevertheless, as artifi-
cial as the creation stage may appear to a beginning practitioner, it is still
necessary.
In practicing we are trying to ameliorate the traces of our previous
wrongdoing, especially our obscurations, which consist of the cognitive
obscuration and the afflictive (or emotional) obscuration. Because of the pres-
ence of these obscurations, we experience the world in an incorrect and
deluded way; our experience of what we call samsara consists of deluded
projections. What we are trying to do in our practice is to transcend these
deluded projections and experience the pure reality, or pure appearances,
that lie behind them. It is not sufficient simply to tell ourselves, "I know
that what I am experiencing is adulterated by delusion," and then to stay
with these deluded projections. As long as you continue to invest energy in
them they will continue, even though you recognize them, at least theoreti-
cally, to be invalid. We have to reject, to cast aside, our involvement with
delusion and actually consciously attend to and cultivate attention to pure
appearance. By doing so you can gradually transcend and abandon delusion.
It is for this purpose that we make use of iconography, or, in other
words, deities. In the Vajrayana the deity is something very different from
what we normally mean by that term. Normally when we say "deity," we
imagine some kind of external protector or higher power, something supe-
rior to us, outside of us, that can somehow lift us up out of where we are
and bring us to where we want to be. Therefore, concurrent with our con-
ventional idea of deity is the assumption of our own inferiority to deities.
In comparison to the deity, we consider ourselves as an inferior, benighted



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
being that has to be held up by something outside ourselves. But the Vajra-
yana notion of deity is not like that, for in the Vajrayana, practitioners
visualize themselves as the deities with which they are working.
This body that you now consider to be so impure and afflicted is an
extension of the nature of your mind. Therefore, in practice you consider
this apparently impure body to be the body of your vidam, the deity upon
whom you are meditating. Since buddha nature is the most fundamental
essence of your mind, and since your body is the projection of that mind,
your body is pure in nature. You acknowledge that fact in practice by
imagining your body to be pure, not only in essence, but in appearance.
Through cultivating this method, eventually the actual appearance or expe-
rience of your body comes to arise in purity. The creation stage is necessary
in order to work with the deluded projections in this way.
DEVOTION AND PURE VISION
In order to practice the creation and completion stages, it is essential to
have devotion, to have faith, and to have pure vision or sacred outlook.
Devotion has two aspects: one is enthusiasm, the other is respect. This
means being interested in and enthusiastic about the Dharma, and having
the respect that comes from understanding its validity and significance.
One extends this same attitude toward one's root guru and the gurus of the
lineage, being interested in them, and having respect.
Another important disposition is the attitude of pure or sacred vision.
Pure vision is one of two ways that we can look at the world. You can look
at anything in a way that sees what is good about it, that sees the purity of
it; and you can look at anything in a way that sees what is wrong with it,
that sees it as impure. Any action can be conducted either with an attitude
of purity or of impurity.
For example, a simple act of generosity, giving something to someone,
could be done mindlessly, simply to get rid of something you don't need, or
done without checking to see whether it actually is appropriate for that per-
son. That attitude is not one of pure vision but of carelessness an impure
outlook. Or you can give consciously. You can carefully evaluate the situa-
tion and determine that the gift you are giving is actually what the person
needs. The same is true of any action or situation. For instance, you could
be very patient with a situation simply through thinking, “This person who



Creation
Completion
is abusing me is pathetic anyway, and I can't do much about it, so I might
as well be patient.” But this is not a pure vision. Instead you could have an
attitude of courage, thinking, "Even if there were some way I could get back
at this person, I would never do it." That would be a pure or sacred atti-
tude. The point of a pure vision is to emphasize positive qualities rather
than defects; especially, to be free from the type of projection that causes
you to see others' qualities as defects. If you have this kind of pure vision,
then through it and from it devotion will arise. If you possess devotion,
chen devotion itself will bring you the results of practice.
Devotion is necessary because fundamentally we need to practice
Dharma, and if you have one-hundred-percent confidence in Dharma, then
your practice will be one hundred percent. If you have less confidence, then
your practice will be less intense. The less intense your practice, the less
complete the result. Therefore, it is essential to have confidence in, and
devotion for, Dharma itself. For that to occur there has to be trust in the
individuals who teach you Dharma. There has to be trust in the guru. If
you trust the guru, then you will trust the Dharma, and if you trust the
Dharma, then you will practice it.
However, faith in one's guru does not mean blind faith. It does not
mean believing “My guru is perfect,” even though your guru is not per-
fect. It is not pretending that your guru's defects are qualities. It is not
rationalizing every foible of the guru into a superhuman virtue. After all,
most gurus will have defects. You need to recognize them for what they
are. You don't have to pretend that your guru's defects are qualities,
because the object of your devotion is not the foibles, quirks, or defects of
your guru, but the Dharma that your guru teaches you. You are not prac-
ticing the guru's foibles. As long as the Dharma you receive is authentic
and pure, then that guru is a fit object for your devotion. The result that
you get, you get from the Dharma that you practice. You need to recog-
nize the defects of your guru as defects--you don't need to pretend that
they are otherwise. The guru's defects cannot hurt you, because it is not
they that you create and cultivate. You follow the teaching of the guru,
and “trust,” meaning trust principally in the validity of the teachings
themselves.



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
THE TWO TRUTHS
The next topic the text addresses is that of the two truths: relative truth
and absolute truth. Basically, understanding the two truths is seeing that,
in their nature, all things are empty and like magical illusions. This should
not be misunderstood to mean that therefore nothing has any moral value,
that nothing has any meaning. Relative appearances, because of their con-
sistencies within their own context, do have a moral value, but ultimately
their nature is emptiness.
UNDERSTANDING THE QUALITIES OF THE PATH
Finally, the last of the eight topics a beginner needs to know is understand-
ing of the qualities of the gradual path itself. This means that you will
know how to practice based upon an honest assessment of your own spiri-
tual state. You may be a beginner, or you may be an advanced practitioner,
someone who has grasped a very exalted view. If you look at yourself and
you feel like a beginner, then you are a beginner. If you look at yourself
and you discover that you have a very high view, then you have to accept
that you should do the practices appropriate for someone with a very high
view. To force yourself to do the practices appropriate for a beginner
would be inappropriate.
This completes the eight topics one needs to know about in the begin-
ning in order to approach this path.
QUESTION: Regarding the last point, assessing one's own self in terms of
one's development, what if you think you have a high view but you are
actually very stupid and just arrogant? How can you determine this?
RINPOCHE: It is possible to deceive yourself in that way, but if you look at
your own situation completely, then you will be able to detect that self-
deception. From among the types of pride, considering yourself to possess
qualities that you lack is called "full-blown pride.* Fully manifest, full-
blown pride. Full-blown pride is not difficult to detect. If you look to see
whether this pride is present in your way of thinking and in your motiva-
tion, then you can usually spor it very easily.
QUESTION: What are some examples of beginning practices, middle prac-
tices, and advanced practices?



Creation
Completion
RINPOCHE: One begins with shamata practice, meditation on the four
reminders, and cultivation of the preliminary practices in order to accumu-
late merit. Then one undertakes the meditation of the creation and com-
pletion stages. Finally, one engages in the conduct of a siddha in order to
attain full awakening.
Essential Points for Traversing the Path
Now, following the text, we will look at what is necessary once one has
entered onto the path.
First of all, all of the Buddha's teachings are included within two paths.
They are the stable and gradual path of the sutras and the quick and espe-
cially effective path of the Vajrayana, or the tantras. Both of these cake as
their root the taming of the mind, or pacifying the thoughts and kleshas
that afflict our minds. With respect to their aim, the paths of sutra and
tantra are the same, but they differ in their methods. The methods for
pacifying thoughts and kleshas can be divided into the techniques of aban-
donment, transformation, and recognition.
THREE TECHNIQUES POR PACIFYING KLESHAS
The sutras in general teach the path of the rejection or abandonment of the
kleshas, which is based on seeing the kleshas as a problem and therefore
being motivated to let them go. Exactly how to let go of the kleshas is
taught in the sutras. Now, there are many kleshas, but principal among
them, and at the root of all the others, are what are called the three poisons
of attachment, aversion, and bewilderment. If we use attachment as an
example, in the path of abandoning the kleshas you determine that you
must reject or relinquish attachments. Our attachments and cravings come
from a mistaken assumption that the things to which we become attached
will endure and that they will retain lasting characteristics. Therefore, in
order to remove this attachment, you meditate on the impermanence of
things, and come to recognize that they are constantly changing and are
ultimately destructible and impermanent. You also meditate on the
unpleasant nature of all the things that you assume are pleasant.
The third of the root kleshas is bewilderment, which essentially refers
94



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
to ignorance itself. Ignorance occurs in two forms, mixed ignorance and
unmixed ignorance. Mixed ignorance is the ignorance that always accom-
panies any klesha; it is called mixed ignorance because it is the arising of
ignorance mixed with the arising of another klesha. No klesha can arise in
the absence of ignorance; therefore, when attachment arises, for example,
it is based upon some ignorance, some fundamental mistake about the
characteristics of the object of attachment. When anger arises, it never
arises alone, because anger by itself in the absence of ignorance would be
powerless. The same is true of pride and jealousy. There is always some
fundamental confusion that is the condition for the arising of that partic-
ular klesha. Unmixed ignorance is ignorance in itself, not knowing or not
being aware of the nature of things. That unknowing is the most funda-
mental aspect of ignorance. The unknowing becomes a misconception or
a mistaken understanding when, on the basis of unknowing, we cultivate
a mistaken view through incorrect reasoning. Therefore, while bewilder-
ment in itself is not as vivid or as immediately unpleasant as the other kle-
shas, it nevertheless is the root of all kleshas and of all suffering.
The reason that bewilderment feeds, nourishes, and reinforces the kle-
shas is because bewilderment fixates upon the perceived characteristics of
objects as either pleasant or unpleasant. When you perceive an object upon
which you fixate as pleasant, you generate attachment. When you perceive
an object that you fixate upon as being unpleasant, you generate aversion.
When you fixate upon something as being extremely unpleasant, you gen-
erate manifest suffering. In order to abandon fixation you meditate upon
interdependence. Through the recognition that all things lack independent
existence and are but interdependent arisings, your fixation on their per-
ceived characteristics diminishes. Through diminishing that fixation your
ignorance diminishes, and through that the kleshas are pacified. That is the
path of abandonment of the kleshas. This type of abandonment medita-
tion is used whenever kleshas arise and whenever there is a problem of
mental misery or physical discomfort or pain.
The second approach, that of transformation, is characteristic of the
path of secret mantra, or the Vajrayana. In this approach whenever a klesha
arises, or any other kind of difficulty, pain, or problem, instead of attempt-
ing to abandon it, you visualize yourself as a deity manifesting it. It could
be any deity, or it could be a deity particularly connected to the klesha or



Creation
Completion
problem with which you are dealing. For example, it could be one of the
five buddhas: Vairochana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, or
Amoghasiddhi. In dealing with desire, it could be a deity shown in sexual
union. In dealing with anger, it could be a deity shown in a wrathful form.
The idea is that you stop conceiving of yourself as yourself and you think
of yourself as the deity. Through visualizing yourself as the deity, the emo-
tional state ceases to be a klesha, because your attitude has been changed.
The emotion itself is transformed into something pure.
The third approach to the kleshas is the path of recognition, which
means recognition of the nature of whatever klesha arises. In this approach,
when a klesha arises in your mind, it is recognized as merely a relative and
dependent thing. We experience the arising of kleshas accompanied by all
kinds of suffering, sadness, misery, and depression; but if you actually look
at the nature of what is arising, you will see that what is occurring is not
what you normally consider to be occurring. For example, when I become
angry, I generate a thought of anger that has a particular object. I think,
“This person is my enemy," and I am aware of this thought of being angry.
When I don't look directly at the anger, the intensity of the anger and its
attendant suffering seem intolerable. But if, while this thought of anger is
arising and is present, you look straight at it, look to see how it arises, where
it comes from, where it is while it is present, and exactly what it is in sub-
stance, you find that there is nothing you can point to. There is nothing in
your mind anywhere that you can point to and say, "This is my anger."
Anger in its nature is empty of any kind of true existence. When, in the
midst of the emergence of the anger, you see and experience its emptiness
directly, then it is naturally pacified. This works with any other kind of suf-
fering or with any of the other kleshas as well. It is simply the recognition
that there is really no thing there. This is the path of the recognition of the
nature of kleshas.
According to the teachings given by the Buddha in the sutras, the
beginning of the path of abandonment of the kleshas is a process called
"distancing," which means to distance yourself from the kleshas.
Normally when various thoughts and kleshas arise in our minds, we gen-
erate a further fixation on them. We become attached and addicted to
them. The first step in letting go of the kleshas is therefore letting go of
this fixation. The fixation is based upon thinking of them as something



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
valuable, and identifying with them. Thus we have to recognize that kle-
shas are problems, that they are useless and harmful. Recognizing this is
not simply being aware of it theoretically, but cultivating the habit of rec-
ognizing it all the time. Doing so will not immediately eradicate the kle-
shas. But gradually, by not identifying with them and not valuing them,
you will become distant from them in the sense that you will have less fixa-
tion on them when they arise, and this will make them easier to abandon.
Having cultivated distancing, you can go on to employ the various
methods of transcending the kleshas: abandonment, transformation, and
recognition. According to the great teacher Gyalwang Yongdrupa, it is best
to combine these three methods rather than to select one among the three.
For example, he taught that when a klesha arises, first recognize it as a
problem, recognize it as something you do not wish to cultivate. Then gen-
erate the aspiration, “May I never again generate this klesha from this
moment until my attainment of buddhahood." As much as possible, gener-
ate this sense of commitment to never doing so. That is abandonment.
Then you go on to employ transformation. Whatever the klesha may
be, you transform it into altruism by changing your articude. You think,
"May all of the kleshas that are present in the minds of all sentient beings,
and especially this klesha, be absent from their minds and be added on to
this klesha of mine. May whatever suffering that all beings, especially prac-
titioners of Dharma, have through the affliction of this klesha be experi-
enced only by me. May this klesha of mine substitute for all of their kle-
shas." In that way the presence of the klesha itself becomes an occasion for
the generation of an especially good intention. Then, having generated that
intention with the attitude that you are doing so in order to pacify or
remove this particular klesha, you visualize yourself as a deity. Those two
steps of accepting the kleshas of others and visualizing yourself as a deity
comprise the process of transformation.
Next you practice the recognition of the klesha's nature. Continuing to
visualize yourself as the deity you have chosen, you think that in the center
of your body, at the level of your heart, resides your root guru, who is
majestic and beautiful in appearance. Visualizing the root guru there as
vividly as possible, you supplicate, asking that you be granted the blessing
of the nature of the klesha to arise as wisdom-that you may actually see
the nature of that klesha, which is wisdom. After having supplicated in that



Creation
Completion
way, you look at the single nature of three aspects of the meditation: the
deity you are visualizing as yourself, the guru visualized in your heart, and
the klesha that has arisen and is the occasion for the meditation or practice.
Through looking at the single or unified nature of these three things, you
come to recognize the nature of the klesha, which causes it to be naturally
pacified. That is the approach or path of recognition.
OUTLINE OF THE CREATION STAGE
Having presented the instructions for the practices common to both sutra
and tantra, the text now turns to the issues surrounding Vajrayana practice
in particular. These include the practice of the creation and completion
stages in general, and especially the practice of the tradition of uncommon
or special instructions. The text goes first through the creation stage, then
the completion stage, and lastly through the tradition of uncommon
instruction.
Beginning with the creation stage, it is important to remember that
while we practice what is called self-generation (visualization of oneself as
the deity) and front generation (visualization of the deity in front of one-
self), it is self-generation that is principally important. This involves visual-
izing yourself as the deity as vividly as possible, including the deity's color,
costume, implements, and so forth. The details of each specific deity prac-
tice are explained in the liturgy and commentaries of that particular prac-
tice, so in this text no specific instruction is given. This text is concerned
more broadly with the background and theory surrounding the practice of
the creation stage; therefore this stage is presented in four topics: I) the
basis of purification, 2) that which is to be purified, 3) that which purifies
it--the methods, and 4) the result of this purification process.
In order to understand the difference between the ground of purifica-
tion and that which is to be purified or removed, you need to understand
that there are in a sense two aspects to your mind. There is how your mind
is, in its nature, and how it appears or manifests in your experience. From
the point of view of how your mind appears, you could say that your mind
is full of kleshas, of suffering; full of all kinds of confused or deluded pro-
jections. But from the point of view of how your mind really is, there is
nothing in any of this confusion that cannot be abandoned, because this
confusion is secondary or adventitious to the nature of mind itself.



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Therefore, confusion can be purified and removed, and the innate wisdom
of your mind can be revealed and expanded.
The nature of your mind, what your mind really is, even the nature of
what appear as kleshas, is called sugatagarbha or buddha nature, the seed of
all the qualities of buddhas, the seed of all wisdom. This is always present
but is obscured by the presence of the kleshas and other obscurations. The
process of the path consists of revealing just this. It does not need to be
created but to be revealed. Therefore, the basis or ground of purification is
buddha nature, which is the innate presence of the qualities and wisdoms
of buddhas and therefore of yidams.
That which purifies the obscurations of innate buddha nature is the cre-
ation stage of the yidam. The confused projections that make up samsara,
including the kleshas, can be abandoned because they are secondary to the
fundamental nature of mind itself. But in order for you to abandon them,
there has to be a shift in your attitude. As long as you invest energy in the
impurity of the projections, and as long as you view these appearances and
experiences as impure, you maintain them. If you change your attitude and
view them as pure, actually meditate upon them as pure, then you no
longer maintain them.
When you begin the practice of the creation stage as an ordinary indi-
vidual, the approach to practice is called "taking aspiration as path," which
means that preliminary to actually seeing things as pure, you aspire to see
them as pure. Through this process of taking aspiration as path, eventually
you will generate what is called the "clarity of appearance," or the vivid
direct experience of the purity of phenomena. This activity will naturally
purify the delusion. The technique consists essentially of visualizing your-
self as the yidam and visualizing the place in which you find yourself as the
mandala or abode of that yidam. When one begins this practice, the
thought will arise, “I am pretending to be other than what I am." You may
even know through your study of Dharma, your understanding of buddha
nature, and your confidence in the theory of the practice, that this is not
really true, that in fact you are not pretending to be other than you really
are. However, because we have a strong habit of conceiving of ourselves
and everything around us as impure, these thoughts may continue to arise.
In order to counteract them, there are specific techniques built into the
practices that serve as remedies. For example, in order to counteract the



Creation
Completion
thought, "I'm visualizing myself as this deity, but I'm not really the deity;
the deity is really something or somewhere else," you invite this real deity
into yourself. There are other techniques as well, such as repeating a
mantra, radiating and gathering light rays, and so on, all of which are
aspects of the creation stage. As you practice the creation stage, over time
you approach the result or fruition, which is the experience of the innate
purity of both body and mind. That is essentially an outline of the practice
of the creation stage.
THREE ELEMENTS
The practice of the creation stage consists of the cultivation of three ele-
ments: clarity, purity, and stability. Clarity means the clarity of the visual-
ized image, which is the technique of the creation stage. This element
consists simply of visualizing the deity as clearly as you can. Some people,
because of the constitution of their channels and so forth, find it easy to
generate a very clear image. Other people do not. In any case the tech-
nique is the same. With a relaxed mind, you visualize the form of the
deity. In doing so it is natural to develop hope that the form will be
intensely vivid. In fact, you would like the image of the deity to be as
vivid as what you see with your physical eyes.
In practicing visualization you are not using the eye consciousness but
rather the mental consciousness, and the mental consciousness is conceptual.
Unlike the eye consciousness, which experiences the individual characteristics
of forms, the mental consciousness produces an abstraction or a generaliza-
tion; therefore, the visualization will tend to remain something vague.
However, if you continue the practice with a relaxed mind, then gradually the
image will increase in stabilicy and in clarity or vividness. To rest within this
continued dear visualization of the deity (the deity's form, color, position,
costume, ornaments, implements, and so forth) is the practice of the first ele-
ment of the creation stage, the clarity of image, or clear visualization.
When you are cultivating clarity in the visualization, sometimes you
will find that the visualization is less clear, vivid, or stable than usual.
There are things you can do to correct this. For example, the text suggests
that you concentrate for a while in your visualization on one specific detail,
such as the vajra held in the hand, or a scepter, or the jewel on top of the
deity's topknot. Depending upon the nature of what is preventing clear
{OO



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
visualization, there are some choices to make in what you direct your atten-
tion to. In general, if many thoughts are running through your mind and
preventing you from concentrating on the visualization, then it is recom-
mended that you direct your attention to something toward the bottom of
the visualization, such as the lotus seat on which the deity is seated or
standing. If, on the other hand, a kind of corpor or depression prevents the
emergence of clarity or vividness, then it is generally recommended that
you direct your attention to something toward the top of the visualization,
such as the top of the deity's head, the jewel, or the topknot.
The second element of creation-stage practice is purity, or the recollec-
tion of purity. This is often explained as the enumeration in your mind of
the symbolic significance of each aspect of the deity's appearance, i.e., what
each aspect of the appearance represents. But our text points out that if you
do this, it may become too conceptual and can actually disturb your mind
and harm the meditation. What is recommended, practically, to imple-
ment the recollection of purity is to keep in mind that this appearance of
the deity is a vivid or clear appearance without any existence, that it is the
unity of clarity and emptiness, like the appearance of a rainbow in its vivid-
ness and insubstantiality.
The third element in the practice of the creation stage is stability, which
means the stable pride of being the deity. In this practice you identify with
the deity, actually thinking, “I am this deity." This is very important, as it is
the aspect of the creation stage that actually serves as a remedy for our ordi-
nary fixation on a self. The practice or cultivation of stable pride consists of
abandoning the sense of being different from or other than the deity that
you are medicating on as yourself.
QUESTION: In the meditations in the book Progressive Stages of Meditation
on Emptiness, you view emotional reactions as evidence of fixation on self.
Specifically, in the case of grief, one can view grief as something like physi-
cal pain in the form of suffering, or on the other hand, view it as a klesha,
such as anger, based on attachment, duality, and fixation on self. In exam-
ining my own grief, I've come to some understanding of the nature of
interdependence and impermanence and how they are an antidote to the
attachment and duality that lead to grief. But I find only a small level of
understanding. The pain and the suffering are very clearly still there. I am
IOI



Creation
Completion
wondering if this process is the same as that in which one examines some-
thing like anger. The anger dissipates; it goes away. In the context of some-
thing like extreme grief, what does it mean to abandon it? Does it mean
that it goes away, or that it's still there as a matter of relative truth but
understood to be empcy?
RINPOCHE: Grief is not a klesha. It is not considered a cause of suffering
but rather is suffering. One does not need to abandon it in the way that
one abandons kleshas, which cause future suffering. One abandons grief in
the sense of allowing it to be pacified, because maintaining it can cause suf-
fering upon suffering. But whether or not grief can be transcended
depends upon the power of your meditation. When you look directly at
the nature of your grief, it will probably not disappear. However, through
seeing its nature, while the grief will remain present, it will be less over-
whelming. In a sense the heaviness of it will be somewhat pacified, so that
although you will still grieve, your position with respect to your grief will
be different from that of an untrained person. Theoretically, when you see
the nature of grief, it can be totally abandoned, but practically speaking
this doesn't happen. Because our minds are not habituated enough to see-
ing the nature of whatever arises, to abandon it, the grief and sadness will
just be somewhat lessened in their heaviness, but will still be there.
QUESTION: With regard to abandoning the klesha of bewilderment, you
have said that the remedy is meditation on interdependence. I want to see
how that actually works. Say, for example, I perceive that I'm fixated on
perceiving the sound of the birds and the rustling trees as being pleasant. If
there were twenty motorcycles roaring around, I would perceive that as
unpleasant, and yet the nature of the sound is just sound-movement and
vibration. I understand that, but I still have the experience of one being
pleasant and one being unpleasant. How, practically speaking, would one
meditate on interdependence?
RINPOCHE: The perception of things as pleasant and unpleasant is itself
not a problem. The problem only occurs when, for example, in thinking of
something as unpleasant, we develop an aversion to it, which is the point
at which we actively wish to get rid of it. Or, thinking of something as
pleasant, we develop an attachment to it, which means we actively wish to
acquire it or prolong it. It is those things that cause us suffering.
102



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
The reason why meditation on interdependence is beneficial in this
instance is that interdependence is, at the same time, relativity. By recog-
nizing the relative nature of these perceived or imputed characteristics, one
becomes free from fixation upon them. For example, if you were to become
actually tormented by the sound of twenty motorcycles, thinking how
awful and disturbing that sound is, then in that context you would reflect
upon worse sounds. And there are indeed worse sounds that you could be
hearing. By thinking about worse sounds, such as screaming, you would no
longer be fixating on the unpleasantness of the motorcycles. Or, if you
were tormented by being attached to the pleasant sound of birds, then you
could reflect upon the fact that there are far more pleasant sounds you
could hear, and in that way let go of your fixation on hearing the birds.
QUESTION: What is meant on page 41 by the marks and signs of the body
of reality?
RINPOCHE: First of all, the dharmakaya is what is referred to in this passage
as the "body of reality.” It does not in itself possess any physical character-
istics, but the quality of the dharmakaya manifests as the rupakaya, or form
bodies, and they do possess physical characteristics that are normally enu-
merated as thirty-two major and eighty minor marks of physical perfection.
The thirty-two major marks of physical perfection are that the bodies of
buddhas are always beautiful, have certain very specific types of features,
and have certain extraordinary characteristics, such as that the clothing or
robes worn by buddhas will never actually touch their body but will always
be four finger widths away from it, the body of a buddha always has an
extensive halo, and so on. The eighty minor marks of physical perfection
are less pronounced, wonderful physical characteristics that are similar to
the thirty-two major ones.
QUESTION: I have a friend who gets very angry, and his anger has value to
him. If someone harms him, he feels he can avenge himself. He seems to
find satisfaction in just being angry. It's not enough to say to him, "You're
going to cause yourself more suffering." He thinks, "I want revenge." How
can I talk with him?
RINPOCHE: A distinction can be made between anger itself and holding a
grudge. Holding a grudge comes about from having invested in and
103



Creation & Completion
cultivated anger. If you continually invest in anger, then anger will develop
into this tendency to hold grudges, which is the next step or development
of it. Holding a grudge basically consists of never letting go of anger.
Whenever you get angry, it becomes somehow deeply entrenched, and you
hold on to it because you are so used to being angry. The remedy for this
is to cultivate the remedies for anger in general. That will prevent its
becoming entrenched.
One thing you can say to your friend is that he is better off being
patient than seeking revenge, because revenge becomes perpetual. It is self-
maintaining, simply because the act of vengeance itself usually involves
doing more back than what was done to you. This is an illustration of the
fact that kleshas such as anger always include ignorance. In this case, the
ignorance lies in part in that when you seek revenge, you don't stop to
think that the person on whom you are exacting revenge will probably feel
victimized by your exacting more than is fair, and will want to get revenge
on you in return. If this goes on long enough, eventually both people will
regret it, because they will have harmed each other without either really ever
being satisfied by what they have done.
QUESTION: On page 49, the text reads, “Do not meditate on pride, cut
through the root of ego-clinging." The following line says, "When ego-
clinging is destroyed, wherever one's mind focuses, its essence arises vividly."
Could you comment on the phrase "wherever one's mind focuses, its
Essence arises vividly."
RINPOCHE: It means that when fixation on a self has been eradicated,
wherever the mind is directed, that selflessness, that absence of self that is
the mind's nature arises vividly in your direct experience.
QUESTION: On page 45, in the section that begins, “In some of the highest
yogatantras of secret mantra," what is meant by "the emanation from the
organs in union"?
RINPOCHE: This is in a section of the text discussing the technical details of
different types of deity practice. Here it describes a specific type of creation
stage, a gradual development of the visualization of the deity in which, in
some practices, the deity is actually generated twice. First, through whatev-
er gradual process, you generate yourself as the deity. Then that deity dis-
104



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
solves and melts into a sphere of light, and from that sphere of light you re-
emerge as the deity. These deities are called the "causal vajra holder" and
the resultant vajra holder." What is referred to as the vajra holder corre-
sponds to the mind of luminosity or clear light that occurs at the death of
the previous life and that subsequently emerges from the bardo into con-
ception and birth in the next life. In a sadhana practice where the text says
* from the secret space...," the deity who is generated in this dual way has a
retinue before the causal vajra holder. In that case there will be a father and
mother in union, and before they melt into light, from the secret space of
the mother, the other members of the mandala will have merged and taken
their places in the palace. Then the father and mother causal vajra holder,
the central figures, will melt into light and then re-arise.
The basic idea here is that you are purifying the way you are conceived
and come into the world. At the end of the previous life, you are alone and
then you die. Before you are reborn, there are already the parents, and so
on. The body that you have is a mixture of three things: the white con-
stituent, which is the sperm from the father, the red constituent, which is
the ovum from the mother, and the wind element, which is the mount for
your consciousness as it actually enters the womb and combines with the
other two. The function of these visualizations is to correspond to, and there-
by purify, fixation on the mixing or combining of these three elements.
LES
QUESTION: What does it mean that "the vital drops purify the white and
red appearances"?
RINPOCHE: In this section (page 45) Jamgön Kongtrul is giving a list of dif-
ferent elements, not all of which are likely to be present in the same prac-
tice. For example, when he says that "through the gradual disappearance of
the three syllables, appearance, increase, and attainment are purified," he's
talking about something that occurs in some practices in which you visual-
ize the three syllables and then they disappear, and the visualization pro-
ceeds from there. When he says, "through the drops, the appearances of
white and red are purified," he is referring to the visualization of the sphere
of light that occurs when the causal vajra holder has dissolved before the
resultant vajra holder has arisen. What you are purifying is your attitude
about the white and red constituents, the sperm and the ovum, which are
the substantial, or physical, basis for the emergence of your own body.
IOS



Creation
Completion
QUESTION: Are the vital drops the same thing as the white and red
appearances?
RINPOCHE: It is not so much that the drops are the same. It's that they cor-
respond. The visualization of this white and red sphere intermingled,
which then becomes the resultant vajra holder, is a way of representing,
and therefore purifying, your fixation on the white and red drops that you
received from your parents.
QUESTION: So the vital drops are the causal vajra holder?
RINPOCHE: No, when the causal vajra holder melts into light, he or they or
she, depending upon what the deity is, become a sphere of light that is
mixed white and red.
QUESTION: And those are the vital drops?
RINPOCHE: That's what is referred to here as the "drop." It represents the
vital drops, but here the visualization is of a sphere or drop. The word
tig-le, which the translator here translated as "vital drop," can also mean
sphere.
Purification
The structure and format of creation-stage practice corresponds to the way
we are born. Being born is the acquisition of a new body. A new body, of
course, does not mean your first body, just your latest body, your most
recently acquired body. There are four different ways that sentient beings
can be born. The first is womb birth, as with humans and other mammals,
where you are born from the womb of your mother. The second, which is
very similar, is egg birth, where you are hatched from an egg that has
issued forth from the womb, as is the case with birds and reptiles. Those
two types of birth are fairly coarse in manner. The third one is a little more
subtle, and although it is often presented as a separate type of birth, it can
also be understood as a variation of either womb or ege generation--birth
from heat and moisture.
These first three types of birth correspond to three types of creation-
stage visualization that are principally designed to purify the habit of these
106



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
types of birth. Womb birth is purified by the style of generation called five
enlightening factors, egg birth by what is called the four vajras, and birth
from heat and moisture by what is called the three procedures or three rituals.
The fourth type of birth is the way that beings in certain realms who
have particularly subtle bodies appear. It is an instantaneous birth occur-
ring in the absence of womb, egg, or even heat and moisture. This instan-
taneous birth is purified by what is called instantaneous generation, or
"generation that is complete in an instant of recollection.” In this case the
meditation on the deity does not begin with the establishment of the man-
dala and the seat of the deity, then the placement of the seed syllable on
the seat, its transformation into an implement, and of the implement into
the deity, as is usual in other visualizations. Rather, in an instant of recol-
lection, you simply visualize yourself as the deity. However, although these
four types of visualization (five enlightening factors, four vajras, three ritu-
als, and complete in an instant of recollection) do correspond individually
to the four types of birth, practicing any one of these purifies all four.
Once you have generated the deity's form through any of these four
procedures, then you visualize that deity with its particular position, color,
costume, ornamentation, implements, with the father, the mother, the ret-
inue, the mandala in which they abide, and so on. From that point onward
the practice will vary. Depending upon the specific practice, there may be
many other steps and stages. In all cases, the practice will conclude with
what is called the dissolution phase." Dissolution refers to the dissolution
or withdrawal of the mandala into the clear light, or emptiness. The entire
practice can either be very elaborate or very simple and concise. Either way,
the entire practice, beginning with the generation of the deity and culmi-
nating with the dissolution of the deity and mandala into the clear light,
corresponds to all the events of one life, from the time the consciousness
enters the womb until the dissolution of death.
NYINGMA AND SARMA
There are many variations in the procedure, style, and content of these
creation-stage practices, as I have mentioned. For example, in Tibet there
were two periods in the introduction of Buddhism. The initial spread of
the teachings in the eighth and ninth centuries led to what is called the old,
or Nyingma, tradition. The subsequent renewal of the doctrine with the
107



Creation
Completion
introduction of new translations from India in the eleventh century led to
what is called the new, or Sarma, tradition. The procedures and style of
the practices of the creation stage in the Nyingma and Sarma traditions
vary somewhat, at least in appearance and in method, but there is no dif-
ference in their effectiveness in the actual purification of the kleshas. If, for
example, one had an illness of the eyes, one might treat it with a surgical
procedure or one might creat it with medication. In either case, one could
remove whatever is obstructing or obscuring one's vision. In the same way,
although the actual methods vary slightly, the focus of both the Sarma and
the Nyingma creation-stage practices is identical.
Next the text gives a description of how a creation-stage practice works.
The type of creation-stage practice that the text uses for an example is basi-
cally a Nyingma model, but it will give you an idea of a creation-stage pro-
cedure. The characteristic of a Nyingma approach to the creation stage is
the cultivation of what are called the three samadhis or three meditative
absorptions. These correspond to the dharmakaya, the sambhogakaya, and
the nirmanakaya. The first samadhi, connected with the dharmakaya, is
called the samadhi of suchness, and essentially consists of meditation on
emptiness. It corresponds to and purifies one's death in the preceding life,
up to the point at which the appearances of the preceding life have van-
ished and there is an experience of nothing whatsoever, which is like
emptiness.
Following this meditation on emptiness, which is the samadhi of
suchness and corresponds to the dharmakaya, is meditation on the com-
passion that has the characteristics of a magical illusion. This is called the
all-arising samadhi. It corresponds to the sambhogakaya, and it purifies
the subsequent experience of the bardo (one's experience after one's pre-
vious death and before one's conception in this life). The function of this
second samadhi is to form a link between the dharmakaya and the coarse
or full manifestation of the nirmanakaya. Therefore, it forms the basis or
prelude to the generation of the mandala.
The third samadhi, which is connected to the nirmanakaya, is called
the samadhi of cause and is the initial visualization of the seed-syllable of
the deity. This corresponds to the emergence of your consciousness from
the bardo and its actual entrance into the womb. Therefore, along with
visualizing the seed-syllable, one visualizes the seat of the deity, which will
108



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
consist of either a lotus with sun and moon disks or a lotus with either just
a moon or just a sun. One begins by imagining this lotus, sun, and moon
seat; this corresponds to and purifies the white and red elements, the sperm
and ovum that come from the parents and are the physical or substantial
basis for your physical body. Then you visualize, on top of this, the seed-
syllable of the deity; this corresponds to and purifies the entrance of your
consciousness from the bardo into the womb at the time of conception
Next, visualize the seed-syllable changing into the deity's characteristic
implement, which is marked at its center by the seed-syllable; this corre-
sponds to the period of gestation in the womb. When the implement,
together with the seed-syllable, is transformed into the complete body of the
deity, this corresponds to and purifies the moment of birth. Having visual.
ized yourself as the deity, you imagine the three syllables of OM, AH, HUNG
in the three places of the deity's body; this purifies the habits from this life
of body, speech, and mind. This procedure is characteristic of the Nyingma
school, beginning with the three samadhis and culminating in the gradual
generation of the deity from syllable, implement, and the entire body.
In the tantras of the Sarma school, one often finds the generation of the
"causal vajra holder" and "resultant vajra holder," which is a different way
of generating the deity. The more elaborate practices of the Sarma school
tend to include two generations of the deity. First, through a gradual pro-
cedure, the deity is generated as the causal vajra holder. This first form of
the deity is generated in order to purify the death process of one's previous
life. The causal vajra holder form of the deity that has been generated will
then melt into light, becoming a sphere of light. From that sphere the deity
is generated a second time, and this deity is called the resultant vajra
holder. This visualization corresponds to and purifies the arising of the
mental body in the bardo, as well as the entrance of that consciousness
arisen as a mental body into the womb--the process of gestation and birth.
The details of these practices can vary quite a bit. For example, in some
practices with causal and resultant vajra holders, when the causal vajra
holder emerges, the other deities of the mandala will emanate from the
secret space of the consort of the principal deity. Then the causal vajra
holder, father and mother, will melt into light and become a sphere of
light. At that point the dakinis and other emanated deities of the retinue
will request the central deity, now in the form of a sphere of light, to arise
109



Creation de Completion
from emptiness for the benefit of beings, in response to which that sphere
of light will turn into the resultant vajra holders. Furthermore, in some
other practices, rather than using the causal and resultant vajra holder, the
end of one's previous life is purified by visualizing the gradual dissolution
of the three syllables OM, AH, HUNG. These correspond to the stages of
death called appearance, increase, and attainment. Thus, there are many
variations within the Sarma school creation-stage practices.
Whether the practice is of the Nyingma or Sarma style, once the deity
has been generated completely, usually you will visualize that, from the
heart of yourself as the deity, rays of light shoot out and invite the wis-
dom beings, or jnanasattvas, which are the actual deity. You imagine that
these are invited and dissolve into you, at which point you rest in the con-
fidence that the jnanasattvas have actually entered into your being. This
corresponds to and purifies the learning process you go through after
birth. Following that, usually you will again invite the five male and
female buddhas, who will bestow empowerment upon you as the deity.
This is done in order to purify your family inheritance, everything that
you inherit from your parents. Then there will be homage, offerings, and
praises to yourself as the deity. The function of these stages of the practice
is to purify all of your interactions throughout this life with the various
objects of experience, including your possessions, and so on. In short,
every step of the creation-stage practice is designed to correspond to and
purify something upon which we project impurity.
MANTRA
Next comes the repetition of the mantra. The mantra repetition purifies
all of your talk and conversation throughout your life, especially talk
connected to attachment, aversion, and bewilderment. Following that
comes the dissolution of the visualization into emptiness and finally the
re-arising of yourself as the deity. These processes correspond to your
death at the end of this life and to your re-arising in a mental body in the
bardo. Hence the procedure of any one creation-stage practice completely
corresponds to all of the events of one life cycle, starting with the bardo
and the entrance of the bardo consciousness into the womb, going
through your whole life and ending with your death, and again your
entrance into the bardo.
IIO



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
Invariably such practices are preceded by going for refuge and generat-
ing bodhichitta, and are followed by the dedication of merit and the making
of aspirations. These are essential for the practice to be a Mahayana prac-
tice. Going for refuge and generating bodhichitta establish your intention
for the practice at the beginning, along with making aspirations for the
benefit of beings and, at the end, dedicating the merit to all beings. These
Mahayana practices are used to enhance the technique of the creation-stage
practice and make it a proper Mahayana practice.
In many creation-stage practices there will be additional elements, such
as the consecration of the offerings and sometimes a feast offering. The pur-
pose of the consecration of offerings and the making of feast offerings is to
gather the two accumulations, the accumulation of merit and the accumu-
lation of wisdom. Although the text says "to gather the two accumula-
tions,“ principally these lead to the accumulation of merit. In the general
context of Mahayana, merit is accumulated by means of the first five
paramitas: generosity, morality, patience, diligence, and meditation. In the
specific context of Vajrayana, the methods by which merit is accumulated
emphasize the practice of visualization. This means, a small thing can be
magnified or multiplied in its power so that one accumulates vast amounts
of merit without much difficulty. For example, in feast practice you use a
very small offering as a basis for meditation, and in medication you multi-
ply it extensively. It therefore becomes a basis for an accumulation of merit
that is far greater than the offering itself. The idea here is that through per-
fecting or completing the accumulation of merit, you also come to accu-
mulate wisdom. But the most direct effect of these feast offerings and
offering consecrations is principally the accumulation of merit.
THE NATURE OF DEITIES
The fourth topic concerning the creation stage is the result of purification:
Everything that obscures the pure ground is removed, and the sugatagarbha,
or buddha nature, that is itself the ground of purification is fully revealed.
The view of the creation stage is that this buddha nature itself contains all of
the qualities of the deities. So when you visualize yourself as a deity, you are
visualizing yourself as something that is a similitude of, that has the same
characteristics as, your own buddha nature. By doing this you familiarize
yourself with buddha nature and therefore allow buddha nature to reveal
III



Creation
Completion
itself. It is not that through the creation stage you are creating a result. You
are revealing the ground as a result. The result is that through this process
of familiarization, taking the appearance of the ground as the path, you
come to fully reveal that ground. When everything that obscures it has
been removed, then chat ground fully revealed is itself the fruition or
result. In other words, the result does not come from outside; it is revealed
from within.
The creation stage is the practice of a yidam, and you do that specific
yidam practice exactly as it is prescribed in the liturgy for it. If the liturgy
prescribes a long and elaborate series of steps to the visualization, that is
what you visualize. If it is concise and prescribes that the deity be visual-
ized complete in an instant of recollection, then that is what you visualize.
In either case, in the principal or main practice of a yidam, you visualize
yourself as that deity, as that yidam.
We also do other practices where the emphasis is not on visualizing
yourself as a deity but on visualizing deities external to yourself. For exam-
ple, when we visualize the sources of refuge as part of refuge or prostration
practice, we visualize them in front of ourselves. When we visualize
Vajrasattva in the Vajrasattva preliminary practice, we visualize Vajrasattva
seated above our head. When we do the Chenrezig practice, we commence
with the visualization of Chenrezig above our head. The reason that, in
these three types of practices, the visualization is different from a conven-
tional creation-stage practice of self-visualization is that they are designed
for beginners. You cannot start by simply revealing your own inner wis-
dom, which is the principal reason for self-visualization. You have to begin
by visualizing external deities and their qualities.
We should be clear about the nature of the deities in the Vajrayana,
especially because it seems we almost externalize them in some practices.
We should view them primarily as something internal, something that is
within us. First of all, a distinction needs to be made between the use of a
deity in a nontheistic tradition such as Buddhism and in a theistic tradition
such as Hinduism. In Hindu practices that work with the iconography of
deities, the deities are considered to be external and essentially to have the
role of creators of the universe. It is believed that these deities have the
power to make you happy and to make you suffer. These deities, if pleased,
have the power to bring you to liberation, to grant you all kinds of
IIZ



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
attainments, supreme and common. Therefore, the practice in such a tradi-
tion consists of praying to deities with the greatest faith and devotion,
making offerings to them with the understanding that if they are pleased,
they will grant you attainments, and that if they are not pleased and
become angry, they can actually cast you into the lower realms.
The Buddhist view of deities is entirely different. First of all, the
Buddhist tradition holds that your happiness and suffering come about
because of your own previous actions, and that no other being can actually
cause you to experience what you have not caused yourself karmicly. What
you experience comes about because of your own previous actions and
habits of perception. Ultimately, from a Buddhist point of view, no deity
can grant you siddhi, or attainment. You receive attainment through your
removal of the obscurations of your innate wisdom. Therefore in the
Buddhist tradition, we do not assert that attainment is actually given to
you by the whim of an external being.
On the other hand, there also exist traditions that say that there is no
help whatsoever from outside, that the path consists entirely of one's own
internal work, and that any supplication of any awakened being is mean-
ingless. But this is not exactly the Buddhist view either, because while it is
true that no buddha can hand you the result of this path, they can help.
For example, if you consider this life, up to a certain point you had no
knowledge of Dharma whatsoever. Then, through some series of circum-
stances, you approached a guru and received instruction; this guru became
your root guru and something changed, and that is called the blessing of
Dharma. Before, you didn't know what Dharma was, and then you did.
Before, you didn't know how to practice, and then you did. Many things
changed as a result. Maybe you had no confidence in Dharma, and then
came to have confidence. You had no devotion, and then you came to have
devotion. You came to have more compassion than you did before. Your
meditation improved. Now, none of these things were precisely given to
you by your root guru, but nevertheless something happens surrounding
your relationship with the root guru, and this is what we call the blessing
of the guru.
This change is easy to understand because it is concerned with your
relationship or interaction with someone you have met, someone who is
another human being. But you also supplicate gurus of the past, gurus you



Creation
Completion
have not met, gurus who are not visible to you at present. So when you
supplicate them, even though, like your root guru, they cannot hand you
attainment or fruition; yet, like your root guru, they can influence and
help you. It is not particularly that by supplicating them they are pleased
and therefore decide to share their spiritual wealth with you, It is rather
that the devotion you generate in your supplication causes this blessing
simply to occur. Therefore the guru can still grant blessing even when he
or she is not physically present in your perception. That is the first of the
three roots, or three sources, of Vajrayana practice, the guru, which is the
root of blessing.
The second root is the yidam, the deity, which is the root of attain-
ment. Essentially, yidams are the forms of the sambhogakaya that buddhas
take in order to communicate with and train beings. It is not the case that
literally speaking your yidam, any more than your guru, can bestow on
you supreme attainment, but, like gurus, yidams can influence you. They
grant you their blessing in the sense that through working with a yidam, a
new clarity dawns in your meditative absorption, and you come to gradu-
ally realize something or attain something. To be precise, we would say
that in calling yidams the root of siddhi, we do not mean that they grant
it, but that they facilitate it.
The third root is the dharmapalas, or Dharma protectors, who are the
root of activity. The function of dharmapalas is to help you free yourself
from anything that impedes your practice and path. They help to
encourage your exertion, encourage your devotion; they help you find
ways to purify your obscurations and your wrongdoing. Dharmapalas are
basically buddhas who take this type of role for the aid of practitioners.
So while it is not the case that any external being can grant you supreme
siddhi, still these three roots--the gurus, yidams, and dharmapalasif
you supplicate them, can bestow blessing and can help remove obstacles
on your path.
For these reasons, as you will discover when you do the intensive prac-
tice of the creation stage in retreat, most creation-stage practice consists of
visualizing yourself as the deity, because the most essential thing in our
practice of the creation stage is to reveal and expand our own innate wis-
dom. While that is the principal practice, in the special circumstances of
feast practice, particularly of self-empowerment, in which you give



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
yourself the empowerment of that specific practice upon its completion,
you not only do the visualization of yourself as the deity, but you also visu-
alize the deity in front of you. You do so because making offerings to the
deity visualized in front of you, as in the context of feast practice, is a pow-
erful way to accumulate merit. By receiving a blessing or empowerment
from the deity visualized in front of you, you will be especially confident
that you have actually received it.
QUESTION: How important is it to visualize the deity exactly as the liturgy
says? For example, if some of the icons of the culture I was raised in come
into the visualization, is that something that I should make sure not to let
happen?
TRANSLATOR: Could you give a specific example of what you mean?
QUESTION: An example is Saint Francis of Assisi as an image of compas-
sion, as well as Avalokiteshvara. Would a visualization of Saint Francis of
Assisi take away from the power of the visualization of Avalokiteshvara?
RINPOCHE: It is acceptable from time to time to remember Saint Francis of
Assisi if it gives you a clearer idea of compassion, but at the same time,
when you are doing a formal practice of visualization, everything in the
visualization is there for a reason, and by working with the details exactly
as they are set out, they will enhance the stability of your mind. In other
words, the creation stage will become a practice of shamata and also of
clarity, not only of the visualization but of the revelation of the mind's
characteristic clarity itself. Ultimately there is more benefit in working with
the practice exactly as it is set out.
We find a reference to this topic in the autobiography of Mipham
Rinpoche in the nineteenth century. He says in his autobiography that he
had some degree of recognition of this mind's nature, which is called the
"clear appearance of the completion stage," since he was a small child. But
he felt that in order to stabilize this and to expand its clarity, he would
have to use the methods of the creation stage. He felt that the technique
of the creation stage, with all of its otherwise troublesome details, was
actually an ideal method leading to the clarification of whatever recogni-
tion of your own mind's nacure you possess. In his autobiography
Mipham Rinpoche said that he was unable to achieve enough of a practice
of the creation stage to fulfill his wish. But he felt that the most important



Creation
Completion
method for generating stable completion-stage realization was the intense
practice of the clear visualization of the creation stage.
QUESTION: When it is said that the white and red elements in the form of
the vital drops, in the head and the navel, meet at the heart and dissolve
together when one dies, are these something other than egg and sperm?
RINPOCHE: Actually the original sperm and ovum have grown to form
your whole body. The drops are not so much the original sperm and ovum
as they are the essence or kernel of them, or you could say the kernel or
essence of what has grown out of them. During your life, according to
tantric physiology, the kernel of the white aspect, which you received from
your father, is housed inside your head, close to the top. The kernel or
essence of the red aspect, which you received from your mother, is seated
below your navel, in the abdomen. In between these two is the basic prana
that keeps you alive. These two actually keep the prana from escaping.
When you die this prana collapses in on itself, into the heart. While these
two keep the prana from escaping, the prana itself keeps the one up and
the other down. When the prana withdraws into the heart, they then go in
with it. The white drop comes down from the head, the red drop comes
up from the abdomen, and they meet at the heart.
QUESTION: So the prana is going between the two?
TRANSLATOR: The specific prana—it is called the life wind.
QUESTION: Are there particular deities that one uses, for instance, to com-
bat pride, or some of the other kleshas? Or can any one of them overcome
all of the kleshas?
RINPOCHE: Both are true. There are specific deities that are connected with
the wisdom that lies at the root of each klesha. For example, the text sug-
gests that if afflicted by desire, visualize yourself as Amitabha. By extension
we would say, if afflicted by bewilderment, Vairochana; by anger,
Akshobhya; by pride, Ratnasambhava; by jealousy, Amoghasiddhi. The
text mentions Chakrasamvara as an example, but that doesn't mean that
you specifically need to use that deity. Still, visualizing yourself as
Chakrasamvara with his consort will serve not only as a remedy for the
affliction of desire but for any other affliction as well.
116



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
QUESTION: Since the yidam is initially visualized outside of yourself and
only very late in the practice do you become the deity, does that mean that
all the various purifications of womb birth and prior bardos and prior
death occur at the time of the visualization of the external Chenrezig?
RINPOCHE: Through the power of your faith in the Chenrezig visualized
above you, at a certain point in the practice, you and all beings take the
form of Chenrezig. In that case, the visualization of yourself is the form of
the deity complete in an instant of recollection. So there's no specific cor-
relation here with at which point of the practice it purifies which event.
However, you could say that when you become the deity, that is purifying
this birth.
QUESTION: At what level does supplication work? When we talk about sup-
plicating gurus of the lineage who have died and dharmapalas, how does
that work?
RINPOCHE: Supplication produces blessing, and although the blessing is
understood as something given to you, something that somehow engulfs
you from outside, in fact blessing really isn't given to you at all. When you
supplicate, you generate faith and devotion. That faith and devotion cause
the appearance of what we call blessing.
QUESTION: Creation practice seems to be dealing with body, speech, and
mind. I'm curious as to what part of creation-stage practice actually puri-
fies relationships with our world and the inhabitants in it, family and
friends and those around us?
RINPOCHE: Because your connections to others, whether positive or nega-
tive, are a part of your interaction with the world, in general your interac-
tions are all purified by the homage, offering, and praise sections of the
sadhana.
QUESTION: Could a person settle on one deity to complete this process? Or
does one try to practice with as many deities as possible?
RINPOCHE: It doesn't matter. It is a question of individual taste and inter-
est. Some people naturally find themselves utterly devoted to the practice
of one deity. It is perfectly possible to pursue that one practice until you
attain the final result. Other people find that they are naturally attracted to
117



Creation
Completion
combining the practices of different deities. They might practice two or
three or even more. There is nothing wrong with that either. By combin-
ing the practice of these different deities, they will achieve the same result
another person does with one.
QUESTION: Purifying relationships with others by paying homage and
making offerings has to do with pure vision, the way one looks at other
beings. It is hard to maintain a pure vision of others while witnessing the
suffering that we inflict upon one another in this life. Is there a key to
doing this?
RINPOCHE: Pure vision is something you cultivate in order to remove your
own confusion. It is not really a method for helping others directly.
Whatever arises in your own ordinary perception is as deluded as what
arises in anyone else's. Also, negative situations are not more difficult to
purify than what you experience normally. Whatever you experience is a
deluded projection, and has to be acknowledged as such and transcended
or transformed with the application of pure vision. This is no more or less
true of any one type of deluded perception than any other.
QUESTION: You said that dharmapalas help us with our activities. This is
intriguing. Could you say more?
RINPOCHE: Dharmapalas are what we would call great beings who some-
times manifest as humans and sometimes especially when we refer to them
as dharmapalas or Dharma protectors-manifest as nonhuman. In their
nonhuman manifestation, which is a manifestation in external form of their
wisdom, they are in a position to actively assist us. So if you ask for their
assistance in removing impediments to your practice, they can actually pro-
vide some help. However, for this process to occur, there has to be some
kind of a connection made between you and the dharmapalas. Principally
this connection is made by your involvement with Dharma itself. Through
practicing Dharma, you become in some sense their responsibility, and then
they will be responsive to your requests for assistance.
QUESTION: Are they what we call devas?
RINPOCHE: First of all, the term "deva" is just the Sanskrit term for deity
or god. It is used to refer to two types of beings. One type is a mundane
118



Commentary by Khenchen Thangu Rinpoche
being called a deva. Devas can be gods of the desire realm, gods of the form
realm, or gods of the formless realm. They are mundane, samsaric beings.
The other type of being, referred to as tha or deva or deity, is supermun-
dane, beyond the world. These are beings who have such wisdom, and
especially such stable bodhichitra, such commitment to the welfare of
others and to benefiting the teachings, that they are entirely unlike a mun-
dane being. Dharmapalas can be thought of as beings who are completely
and utterly committed to the welfare of others and therefore are very active
in accomplishing their welfare.
You could say that dharmapalas are included within the class of things
that we call "devas," just as some awakened people are included within the
class of what we call "humans." But not all humans are awakened, and not
all devas are dharmapalas. There are all different sorts of people. Some peo-
ple are wonderful and some are horrific. It is the same way with devas.
There are wonderful devas, horrific devas, and everything in between.
Dharmapalas are a kind of wonderful deva.
Question: Thinking about science and DNA and how we're altering
beings, as with cloning, would a clone be the same being as its source, since
the clone has the same DNA?
RINPOCHE: In the case of cloning, the clone would be a different sentient
being. You don't have to go as far as cloning. It is really the same process as
when someone is conceived as a human being. The substances come from
the parents, but the child is a different being from the parents. Similarly, if
you clone somebody, then the substance would come from a parent's
body, but that doesn't mean that the cloned person is the same person as
the parent.
QUESTION: When the Buddha is visualized and reappears from the drop, is
the Buddha an adult, a child, or an infant?
RINPOCHE: In the creation stage, even though the rituals correspond to the
different stages of life, you don't visualize the deity first as a little baby
deity and then as a child deity, an adolescent deity, and a mature deity.
You don't take it that far. You're trying to purify all of those appearances.
In order to do that, there has to be some degree of correspondence, but not
to that degree.
119



Creation Completion
QUESTION: Now scientists are capable of fertilizing eggs and keeping them
in a frozen state for a long time. What becomes of the mental conscious-
ness in that state?
RINPOCHE: I don't know. You'd have to ask the scientists who are doing that.
The Emergence of Confusion
SHAMATA AND VIPASHYANA
Our most common practice is tranquility meditation, or shamata. As is
well known, we need shamata practice because our mind is normally
agitated by thoughts; we practice shamata in order to generate a state of
mental stability. While the technique of shamata and the technique of the
creation stage are distinct in that, in the one, your mind is resting on a
very simple and neutral object, and in the other your mind is immersed in
the elaborate visualization of the deity, the function of these two tech-
niques is really the same.
In the practice of shamata, you cultivate a state of attention that tran-
scends the two defects of excessive tension and excessive relaxation. You do
the same thing in the practice of the creation stage. In the visualization of
the form of the deity, or the visualization of the syllables of the mantra, if
your mind is too tight, too tense, then the natural clarity of the visualiza-
tion is diminished; and if your mind is too relaxed, you become distracted.
So while the techniques are distinct, the function of shamata and the func-
tion of the creation stage are fundamentally the same.
However, the creation stage does have a feature that is not overtly pre-
sent in shamata practice. Through the practice of the creation stage, you
not only generate the ability to rest the mind at will, but you also bring out
the mind's innate clarity or capacity for lucidity. This is brought out espe-
cially in the creation stage, not only by the technique of visualization,
which obviously uses and augments the mind's clarity, but also by the vari-
ations in visualization. In creation-stage practice you move from one thing
to another. For example, at one point you visualize the invitation of the
jnanasattvas, and at another point you visualize the radiating and gathering
of light rays. This change of focus in the visualization actually produces new
meditative absorptions at each step. These enhance the development of
Izo



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
mental clarity and the stability of samadhi in general. So the creation stage
is a technique that not only can generate a state of shamata but also assists
in the development of mental clarity. For that and other reasons, it is
absolutely necessary to practice the creation stage. However, the creation
stage is never practiced alone or in isolation. It always has to be combined
with, and succeeded by, the practice of the completion stage.
The relationship between the creation and completion stages in the
Vajrayana is very similar to the relationship between shamata and vipash-
yana in the Sutrayana. In fact, we would have to say that the completion
stage in Vajrayana is in some respect identical to the vipashyana that is
taught in the Sutrayana. "In some respect means that although the tech-
niques of the completion stage are not necessarily identical to the techniques
of vipashyana, the function of the completion stage and the function of
vipashyana are the same. Therefore, we can consider the completion stage to
be a variety of vipashyana, or insight medication. In that context what we
mean by vipashyana and by the completion stage is in both cases meditation
on the nature of one's mind. When we use the term vipashyana to refer to
the completion stage, we are talking about that style of meditation that is
characteristic of the tradition of uncommon instruction.
To make this clear, there are two types of vipashyana practice. One
takes inferential valid cognition as the path, and the other takes direct valid
cognition as the path. Generally speaking, the sutras advance the technique
of inferential valid cognition. This technique consists of using logical rea-
soning to determine the emptiness of all things; starting with the fact that
all relative truths are interdependent, one reasons the validity of emptiness.
In that type of practice emptiness is not an object of direct experience. One
examines phenomena and gradually comes to a conviction that everything
is empry. One then cultivates and stabilizes that conviction until after a
long time it becomes a clear and definite recognition of emptiness.
Sometimes this practice of taking inferential valid cognition as the path is
also called "analytic meditation." Analytic mediation is very stable and
helpful, but it is not quick; it takes a long time. Therefore, in Vajrayana
practice, one does not do analytic meditation. One emphasizes the practice
of direct valid cognition.
If one cakes direct valid cognition as the path, one does not emphasize
thinking about the nature of external things. From the point of view of
121



Creation
Completion
Vajrayana medication, we don't particularly worry about whether external
things are empty or not, because the source of all of our experience, what
we use in practice, what experiences pleasant and unpleasant things, is
our mind. Therefore, in Vajrayana practice we are concerned principally
with the mind itself. In fact, the mind is not only more important to
ascertain the nature of, but is also easier to ascertain. The mind, just as it
is, is an obvious embodiment or demonstration of dharmata, an obvious
embodiment of emptiness. This means that whereas you cannot in the
beginning directly see the emptiness of external things, you can from the
beginning directly see the emptiness of your own mind. When you take
the path of direct valid cognition as a practice, the view of the mind as
empty is not determined through some kind of analysis or logical reason-
ing but by looking directly. This is the characteristic approach of all
Vajrayana meditation. Therefore it is said that if you know the nature of
your mind, this alone will accomplish your aim and practice. As long as
you do not, no other practice and no other knowledge will be of any sig-
nificant help. The many renowned traditions of this type of meditation
mahamudra, the great perfection, the great middle wayww.and terms such
as "simplicity" and "freedom from elaboration all refer to the practice of
this meditation on the empty nature of mind. Meditating on the nature
of mind is essential.
THE NATURE OF THE MIND
Up to this point the text makes no distinction berween what we could call
the pure and the impure aspects of mind. Now it points out that there are
some individuals who, because of their intense devotion, have sponta-
neously recognized or realized the mind's nature. Such a person, having
attained that recognition, has no need to learn the difference between the
pure and impure aspects of mind, how they work, how they manifest;
they already understand what learning those distinctions is intended to
reveal. However, for most people, it is difficult to generate a realization
spontaneously through devotion alone. Most practitioners need to learn
at least a little bit about how mind works. Otherwise, there is a danger
that your medication will not be a recognition of the mind's nature but
will be simply immersion in some kind of blank neutrality or abstraction.
While that is not particularly harmful, it is also not particularly helpful; it
122



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
is somewhat of a shame, a waste of time. Therefore, the text proceeds to
explain how mind works.
What we could call the impure or deluded aspect of mind is referred to
as "consciousness." Consciousness is enumerated as being of eight classes or
groups. Before going into the details of consciousness, it is necessary to
understand the basic view of cognition that is characteristic of Buddha-
dharma. The term cognition in Sanskrit is jnana Jnana just means cogni-
tion, the capacity to cognize. Literally speaking, in Tibetan one would
translate jnana as shepa, or "knowing." However, it is interesting to observe
that when the teachings were translated into Tibetan, jnana was usually
translated not as shepa, but as yeshe. Ye means primordial. The prefix "ye*
was added by the Tibetan translators to point something out about cogni-
tion, which is that cognition, mere clarity, cognitive clarity in and of itself,
has been there from the very beginning. Therefore they translated "cogni-
tion" as "primordial cognition.” But the term “jnana" in itself does not
include this word “primordial," so it refers simply to cognition.
The term for consciousness, which is a specific type of cognition, is jnana.
It is the term for cognition, jnana, with the prefix"vi," which means com-
plete, or fully developed. This is a more specific term than cognition; and
although "fully developed cognition" may sound positive, in this context it
is actually somewhat pejorative, because it refers to cognition that has
developed in the sense of becoming coarsened. This type of cognition, full
cognition, is the consciousness that is divided into eight kinds. All of these
consciousnesses are considered manifestations of the mind's impurity.
They are eight conditions that arise when a mind does not recognize its
own nature.
The basic idea of the development of consciousness is that when a mind
does not recognize its own nature, its inherent lucidity, it runs wild, and
running wild, it develops a coarse, deluded consciousness characteristic of
samsara. Nevertheless, in the midst of all of this confusion, the nature of
these consciousnesses, the nature of this deluded mind, remains
unchanged. This unchanging nature of the mind is called the pure all-basis,
as opposed to the all-basis consciousness, one of the eight consciousnesses.
That pure all-basis is more cognition, fundamental jnana itself. Therefore,
when you wish to make a distinction in Tibetan between the mind in its
impure manifestations and the pure nature of the mind itself, then impure
123



Creation du Completion
mind will be called sem, and the mind itself, mere cognition, will be called
sem nyi.
THE EIGHT CONSCIOUSNESSES
There are different ways that the eight consciousnesses can be explained. In
this text the style of explanation follows that of the third Gyalwa Karmapa,
Rangjung Dorje, especially his book The Profound Inner Meaning, which
was written as an explanation of the theoretical underpinning of the Six
Dharmas of Naropa, and as a clarification of certain points concerning the
Six Dharmas called Distinguishing Between Consciousness and Wisdom.
According to these teachings, the first five of the eight consciousnesses
are called the "consciousnesses of the five gates.” The gates are the five
senses. They are called "gates" because they are the means by which your
mind encounters what is outside your body, the means by which your
mind can project itself or expand itself beyond the body. The first of the
five gates is the eyes. The eyes are the organic basis for the eye conscious-
ness. They encounter as their object visible form-color and shape. When
they encounter chese, what is generated is called the "eye, or visual, con-
sciousness."
Visual consciousness is the first of the eight consciousnesses. The other
four are similar. The second consciousness is connected with the ears;
when the ears encounter their object, which is a sound of any type, what is
generated is called the "ear consciousness" or "auditory consciousness."
The third is connected with the nose; when the nose encounters its object,
which is a smell of any type, what is generated is called the “nose, or olfac-
tory, consciousness." The fourth is the tongue; when the congue encoun-
ters its object, a taste of any type (such as sweet, sour, or bitter), what is
generated is called the "tongue, or taste, consciousness." The fifth one is
the whole body as an organ of tactile sensation; when the whole body
encounters its object, a tactile sensation, what is generated is called the
"body, or tactile, consciousness.” These five consciousnesses operating
through the five senses, or five gates, experience their objects directly. The
eye consciousness actually sees shapes and colors, the ear consciousness
actually detects sounds, the olfactory consciousness actually smells, and so
on. It is direct experience, therefore these consciousnesses are nonconcep-
cual. "Nonconceptual" means that they don't have any thought about the
124



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
characteristics of what they experience. They do not conceptually recognize
the things that they perceive.
That which thinks about what is experienced by the five senses, which
conceptually recognizes them as such and such, which conceives of them as
good and bad, is the sixth consciousness, the mental consciousness. The
mental consciousness does not work with, or appear on the basis of, a spe-
cific sense organ like the other five. It inhabits the body in a general way. It
is normally enumerated as the sixth consciousness, after the other five. The
fundamental distinction between it and the others is that the five sense
consciousnesses, since they engage only in the direct experience of their
objects, can only experience the present. For example, the eye conscious-
ness only sees what is there now. It does not see what was there in the past.
It does not see what will be there in the future. This is also true of the ear
consciousness and so on. The five sense consciousnesses are not capable of
thinking about their objects. Not only can they not think about the past or
the future, they do not even conceptualize or think about the present.
The sixth consciousness on the other hand can and does think about
things. It thinks of the past, both distant and recent. It thinks about the
present and about the future, both proximate and distant. But while it is
capable of thinking, it is not capable of directly experiencing things the
way the sense consciousnesses do. It produces a generality, or abstraction,
on the basis of the things that are experienced by the five sense conscious-
nesses. This means that when the five sense consciousnesses experience
something, it becomes an object of thought for the sixth consciousness,
not in the form of what is actually experienced but in the form of a con-
cept created by the sixth consciousness as a replica of the sense experience.
For example, when I look at the glass on the cable in front of me, my cyes
see it directly, but my mental consciousness does not. It produces a gener-
ality or abstraction, based upon what my eyes have seen, which it recog-
nizes, conceives of as having such and such a shape, considers as good or
bad, and so on.
These six consciousnesses are relatively easy to observe because they are
vivid in their manifestation or function. The other two consciousnesses are
less easy to observe. For one thing, the six consciousnesses start and stop
in their operation. They are generated by certain conditions, and, when
those conditions are no longer present, they temporarily stop functioning.
125



Creation
Completion
Therefore the six consciousnesses are called "inconstant consciousnesses.
They are created as they arise. The other two consciousnesses are called
" constant* consciousnesses. Not only are they constant, or always operat-
ing, but they are also much less observable.
The seventh consciousness is called the "afflicted consciousness." This
refers to the most basic level of mental affliction, or klesha. It refers not to
coarse kleshas, but to the root of kleshas. Specifically, the afflicted con-
sciousness is the most subtle level of fixation on a self. Again, this is not
coarse fixation on a self. This is the subtle level of fixation on a self that is
unfluctuatingly present even when one is asleep. When sometimes you have
a sense of self, and you think “I," that is an operation not of the seventh
consciousness but of the sixth. The seventh consciousness is omnipresent
until you attain a higher level, such as with a first-level bodhisattva,
Although it is not itself directly observable, the afflicted consciousness is the
basis for all coarse fixation on a self and therefore for all coarse kleshas.
The eighth consciousness is called the alaya vijnana or all-basis con-
sciousness. It is so called because it is the basis or ground for the arising of
all other types of consciousness. It is that fundamental clarity of conscious-
ness, or cognitive lucidity, that has been there from the beginning. As the
capacity for conscious experience, it is the ground for the arising of eye
consciousness, ear consciousness, etc. Like the seventh, it is constantly pre-
sent, constantly operating, and it persists until the attainment of final
awakening, or buddhahood.
Along with the eight consciousnesses, there is something else that is
called the instantaneous mind. Many texts present this mind as that which
is generated by the cessation of a previous instant of consciousness and
which links one type of consciousness to another. In the particular presen-
tation found in the Profound Inner Meaning by the third Gyalwa Karmapa,
Rangjung Dorje, the instantaneous mind is presented as that which causes
the lack of recognition of dharmata or of the nature of things, in which
case it would be considered an aspect of the seventh consciousness. The
seventh consciousness in that way has an inward-directed aspect, an aspect
that causes the other consciousnesses to arise and function; that is the
instantaneous mind. The instantaneous mind is thus not a separate con-
sciousness, but an identifiable function of the impure mind; therefore it is
not a ninth consciousness.
126



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
In certain sutras you will see, also, the use of the term receptive con-
sciousness. Receptive consciousness refers to the capacity of the all-basis
consciousness to receive and store impressions. Therefore, it is synony-
mous with the all-basis consciousness. In short, all of the functions or
manifestations of the impure or deluded mind are included in the eight
consciousnesses.
CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEDITATION
Which consciousness performs meditation? Since the first five sense con-
sciousnesses are nonconceptual, they neither require nor are capable of
medication. In the case of shamata practice, which is concerned with the
pacification of thoughts, the sixth consciousness is that which meditates. In
the case of vipashyana, however, meditation is performed by and involves
the sixth, seventh, and eighth consciousnesses.
From the point of view of meditation, one would have to say that
although one can distinguish the sixth, seventh, and eighth consciousnesses
as distinct in their degrees of manifestation or obvious cognitive clarity,
from their own point of view, they are internally basically the same. The
practice of vipashyana consists of protecting the sixth, seventh, and eighth
consciousnesses from delusion: rather than allowing them to run wild in
delusion, one allows them instead to rest in their natural or basic state.
Through doing this you come to experience or know the nature of all
three, i.e., the mental consciousness, the afflicted consciousness, and the
all-basis consciousness. In vipashyana practice the most important thing is
to recognize the nature of these consciousnesses. Therefore, in vipashyana,
they are the object of meditation.
The eight consciousnesses are impure in how they manifest, since they
manifest as delusion based upon the mind's projection of objects. But in
their nature, they are unchanging. The basic nature of the mind, of which
they are the permutations, is pure. Therefore, we find the oft-repeated
phrase "the all-basis is virtuous or good in its nature." This idea of the fun-
damental goodness of the all-basis refers not to the deluded all-basis con-
sciousness but to the all-basis wisdom, which in the context of delusion is
the pure aspect of the all-basis consciousness. This pure aspect has never
been lost in delusion, meaning that the nature of the mind has been mis-
taken, but that nature itself has never been changed or corrupted by the
127



Creation of Completion
mistake. While the manifestation of your mind as a plurality within cogni-
tive clarity seems to be deluded, if you look for some actual substantial
presence of this delusion, you won't find it anywhere. Yet you cannot say
that your mind is a dead or static nothingness, because there is the experi-
ence and presence of cognitive clarity. This basic way the mind really is,
the fact that it is a cognitive lucidity free of any kind of substantial exis-
tence, is what is called buddha nature, and that, of course, is pure. That is
what we attempt to realize or fully experience through the practice of
meditation.
Hence, because the eight consciousnesses are the deluded aspect of
mind, yet their nature is buddha nature itself, in practice it is important
not to follow confused or deluded projections but to look at the nature of
the mind instead. If you attend to the delusion, then it will be reinforced,
but if you look at the nature of the delusion, of that deluded mind, then
you see through it. By means of this you gradually become free from delu-
sion, leading both to attainment of extraordinary samadhi and eventually
to buddhahood. In these states, because of the recognition of the mind's
nature, the thoughts and kleshas that arise have no effect; they do not in
any way obscure or prevent the recognition of that basic nature.
This does not mean that the lucidity that is manifested as delusion is
going to cease, because it is not the case that by seeing the emptiness of
mind, the manifestation of mind disappears or stops. It has always been
empty; seeing this does not make it more empty. What is recognized is
that while mind is empty of any substantial existence, it is a cognitive
lucidity. While being lucid, it is empty; and while being empty, it is lucid.
That is how it remains.
You might ask, "Since the mind's nature is always pure and unchang-
ing, why does the confusion of the eight consciousnesses arise in the first
place?" The confusion or delusion of the mind is like mistaking a mottled
rope for a snake. From the point of view of confusion, we would say that
at the moment at which you first mistake that rope for a snake, confusion
starts; and at the moment at which you come to recognize that the mottled
rope is merely a mottled rope and not a snake, you are liberated from con-
fusion. From the point of view of your delusion or your confusion, there is
a period of delusion, and there is the possibility of liberation. Nevertheless,
as strongly as you might believe that that mottled rope is a snake, the mot-
128



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
tled rope itself has never been turned into a snake by your delusion. It
retains its own nature.
Similarly, one would say that although we mistake mind to be the eight
consciousnesses, and thus generate the appearance or experience of these
eight consciousnesses and their delusion, the mind has always been empty.
Even though we do not experience that emptiness and instead experience
the mind as the eight consciousnesses, in fact the mind has always been
that emptiness, or buddha nature. Not experiencing the mind as it is, we
look away from it, and looking away, we generate delusion. As to when
this deluded activity began, it is beginningless. The delusion has always
been there along with the fundamental nature of the mind.
To use another image, the mind in itself, as inherently nondeluded cog-
nition, is like a mirror. The nature of the mirror is to reflect; it is not its
nature to be obscured. Nevertheless, this mirror, from the very beginning,
has been covered by some kind of rust or grime. The grime is like the all-
basis consciousness. Because there is a little bit of tarnish, over time the tar-
nish increases, and it accrues the grime of further habits in the all-basis,
generating the obscurations that are the mental afflictions. Nevertheless the
nature, not only of the ground itself but also of the all-basis consciousness,
has always been emptiness. What occurs in the absence of recognition, in
the absence of awareness of the true nature of one's mind, is that the empti-
ness of mind, not being recognized as what it is, is mistaken to be a self. So
the empty essence of mind is the basis for designation of the imputed self.
But, again, mind is not just empty. It is cognitive lucidity that is empty
The cognitive lucidity, in its intensity, is mistaken to be an object, is mis-
taken to be external to this imputed self. On the basis of the two main
characteristics of mind, emptiness and lucidity, there is the designation of
self and other, or subject and object.
The way in which we generate the presence or assume the existence of
objects on the basis of the lucidity of mind is like what happens to us when
we go to sleep. When you go to sleep there is a state that in English is called
"hypnogogic.” Before you start to dream, the images that will eventually
arise as dream images are still thoughts. During the period when they are
thoughts, they are simply things that are arising in your mind. But as you
become more decply asleep, you mistake these thoughts for actually occur-
ring events. In other words, the thoughts themselves become images that
129



Creation of Completion
are experienced as objects; this is how thoughts become dreams. The
process is similar to the way in which, under the sway of ignorance, we mis-
take the lucidity of mind to be an object external to ourselves. On the basis
of that dualism-chat imputation of self and other the six consciousnesses
are activated through the function of the instantaneous mind.
When the six consciousnesses arise in this way, there occurs the appear-
ance of the sense organs encountering their objects. As far as the way
things appear to function, there is definitely the appearance in our experi-
ence of external objects that are encountered by the sense organs, produc-
ing consciousness or awareness of those objects. Actually, what we perceive
as external objects and what we perceive as internal faculties are really
aspects of the consciousnesses themselves.
For example, when your eyes see form, what we would normally say
occurs is that there is an external object that your eyes are capable of
encountering; through the encounter between the eye and the object, a
visual consciousness is generated. From the point of view of the way things
really are, what you perceive as external form is the objective or lucid aspect
of the visual consciousness itself; i.e., eye consciousness appears as form. The
empty aspect of the eye consciousness is what you experience as, or presume
to be, the subject experiencing an object. The way a consciousness actually
manifests as its apparent object is like, for example, when you dream of
mountains and react to them with fear or happiness or joy or boredom. In
our normal daytime experience, mountains do scem external to us. We real-
ly think and believe that this lucid aspect of the mind is out there, is an
external form. We really believe and really experience it this way that the
empty aspect of mind is in here and is experiencing the object.
The interaction of all these factors the emergence of the six conscious-
nesses and therefore the appearance of subjects and objects in those six
consciousnesses is all arranged or brought about by the instantaneous
mind. Nevertheless, the experience of the five sense consciousnesses is
direct and nonconceptual. As I explained earlier, it has no connection with
past or future. On the basis of the experience, some sensation is generated.
The sensation causes the emergence of the sixth consciousness, which then
generates concepts about the experience. The sensation is labeled as pleas-
ant, unpleasant, good, bad, and so on, and then there is a recognition of
the characteristics of the object. That is how confusion happens.
130



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
QUESTION: On page 53 the text explains that "The instantaneous mind
moves the six consciousness groups and causes the meeting of object and
organ," and then further down it discusses mistaking the luminous aspect
for form and the empty aspect for the organ. What is the meaning of
"organ"?
RINPOCHE: It means the sense organs themselves. The projection of the
existence of sense organs is based upon the mistaken apprehension of the
empty aspect of consciousness as a subject and therefore as a sense organ.
As far as how things appear, we do have sense organs. For example, the
structure of the eye--the optic nerve, I believe is said to be like a flax
flower. The ears are said to be like a pattern in birch bark. There is an
image for each one of the sense organs. That is how they appear. We have
functioning senses. So the organs from that perspective are the organic
basis for sense perception. But as far as how things are, the development
and experience of sense organs, like the development and experience of
sense objects, is a projection based upon the mistaken apprehension of the
emptiness of consciousness as a self.
QUESTION: Could you explain the point about mistaking luminosity for an
external object? Is this mistake thinking that phenomena are real? If so,
would that be to deny that there is a tree outside when there really is a tree
outside?
RINPOCHE: There appears to be a tree, but the reason there appears to be a
tree is that we have a strong habit of conceiving the appearance of trees;
therefore we experience their appearance. For example, in a dream there
also appears to be a tree. The tree in a dream might be just as vivid as a tree
we experience during a waking state, but we know that there is no tree in
the dream. It is possible that the tree we experience in the waking state
might be a projection also, because we experience what it is our habit to
experience.
Question: Is it true that the person who knows dream yoga can approach
the real world in the same way as one would in a dream? For instance,
could one make the tree disappear?
RINPOCHE: I have no experience of this, but they say so.



Creation
Completion
QUESTION: How is it that we all see the tree in the same place?
RINPOCHE: Common experience is the experience by different individuals of
a similar object or event that they can agree upon as a shared perceptual
experience. It is like having a vase in the middle of a table surrounded by
one hundred mirrors. Each of those mirrors is reflecting the same vase, but
the image contained in each mirror is particular to that mirror. In the same
way, even though different people may see the same thing, what I experience
in my mind is particular to my mind, as it is my experience, and what you
experience in your mind is particular to your mind, as it is your experience.
QUESTION: What is the relationship of compassion to the eight conscious-
nesses? Can the function of instantaneous mind be used to liberate oneself?
RINPOCHE: Manifest compassion arises in the sixth consciousness. The
habit of compassion resides in the eighth consciousness. In a sense, one
could say that even the seventh consciousness presents some kind of com-
passion. The five sense consciousnesses are nonconceptual and have no
particular connection to compassion. With regard to the role of the
instantaneous mind in the path, it cannot be used for the accumulation of
wisdom, because the accumulation of wisdom is accomplished through
the meditative state, in which all of the processes of delusion are at least
temporarily shut down, revealing one's innate wisdom. So the manner of
accumulating wisdom, the manner of liberation itself, is the antithesis of
the linking process that is the instantaneous mind.
On the other hand, the other aspect of the path, the accumulation of
merit, does make use of the instantaneous mind. The instantaneous mind
is used in the accumulation of positive karma when one makes offerings to
buddhas and bodhisattvas, just as it is used in the accumulation of negative
karma. The reason that the instantaneous mind has its place in the merit
aspect of the path but not in the wisdom aspect is that the merit aspect is
concerned with the appearances of relative truth, not with the realities of
absolute truth. Since the instantaneous mind is part of the workings of rel-
ative truth, it can still be used in that context.
QUESTION: Is it possible to have direct experience through all five of the
senses in the same instant?
RINPOCHE: The five sense consciousnesses, when they are functioning, all
132



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
function simultaneously. What is not functioning simultaneously is the
apprehension of the experience of the sense consciousnesses by the sixth
consciousness, which tends to apprehend them only one at a time.
QUESTION: Does the presence of the instantaneous mind cause the experi-
ence of the five sense consciousnesses? Is the instantaneous mind always
present?
RINPOCHE: Yes, because in the case of sensory experience, the instantaneous
mind produces the experiences, bringing them out of the all-basis like a
messenger and then also returning to the all-basis the habit reinforced by
that experience. It is like when you go to the bank. The celler who brings
out or puts in your money for you is like the instantancous mind.
QUESTION: On page 53, at the bottom, the claim, "when the afflictive mind
functions with the instantancous mind, directed inward, it leaves habitual
patterns in the foundation," seems to contradict the earlier statement that
just the arousal of anger doesn't create an imprint.
RINPOCHE: When you simply have a thought of a klesha, that doesn't place
a habit in the all-basis. The instantaneous mind does grab it, as it were, and
deposit it into the all-basis, but it is not yet a karmic habit. There are sever-
al types of habit. Karmic habit is the imprint of an action and manifests as
external experience. From among the various results of an action, this man-
ifestation is a result of complete maturation. Klesha habit itself becomes a
kind of obscuration, but it doesn't manifest as karma.
QUESTION: Does that make it easier for anger to arise again?
RINPOCHE: When the thought of anger arises and is recognized, then the
type of habit that it places is very subtle and doesn't even particularly pro-
mote further arising of thoughts of anger---certainly not the arising of
spite, which unrecognized anger normally would produce. The term "the
thought is liberated" means not that it doesn't place any habit whatsoever,
but that that particular thought is not leading to further such thoughts.
QUESTION: Going back to the discussion about the tree, if we leave aside
language and habit and look at things without our known concepts or our
known way of looking at things, just seeing the object for what it is, it
133



Creation
Completion
doesn't have to be a tree. Is that what happens? Or are you saying that all
things are imagined?
RINPOCHE: There are two ways to understand this. It depends on whether
you are emphasizing the way things are or the way things appear.
According to the way things appear, we would say that the imputation of
the tree is a projection of your mind and that the basis for the imputation
is not your mind, it is "out there." But viewing it from the point of how
things really are, we would say they are both your mind.
QUESTION: Of the eight different kinds of consciousness, are the seventh
and the eighth those that move on into the bardo?
RINPOCHE: No, all of them do. In the bardo you have a mental body that
has its own mental forms of the five sense consciousnesses as well as the
sixth mental consciousness. In the bardo you still sometimes see things
from your previous life, the places and people and so on.
To be more precise, there are several stages to the interval of the bardo.
First, what happens as you die is that there is a dissolution process where
the appearances of this life dissolve and then temporarily cease. Really
there are two dissolutions: a physical dissolution and a mental dissolution.
At the end of these.--the coarse and subtle dissolutions immediately after
death-dharmata appears, the direct experience of the nature of things.
However, if the person has not cultivated a recognition of dharmata in the
preceding life, then they will not recognize it in the bardo. Its mere appear-
ance will not produce liberation. Nevertheless, in that phase of the bardo
at which the dissolution process is complete and the appearance of the
dharmata occurs, the six consciousnesses temporarily cease and only the
seventh and the eighth are still functioning. However, after that, when
they re-arise from that bardo of dharmata in a mental body, then all eight
are back again.
Working with Confusion
Next the text instructs us in how to work with the emergence of confusion
in our practice. Practitioners (people practicing shamara, vipashyana, the
creation stage, and the completion stage), when the immediate mind first
134



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
arises from the all-basis consciousness, attempt to rest in the practice, to
rest in the samadhi that they have cultivated. If they do so, then the devel-
opment of confusion or delusion that arises along with the instantaneous
mind will not progress beyond the instantaneous mind's arising itself.
Essentially what you attempt to do here is rest in an awareness of the bud-
dha nature, in the recognition of the emptiness and manifest lucidity of
your mind. In the beginning, this has to be mostly an aspiration. Then, as
one gains experience, what are called the example wisdom and the actual
wisdom will arise. The wisdom of example is not a full or direct recogni-
tion of the buddha nature; it is a recognition of something that is like
buddha nature. When you rest in a basic recognition of the emptiness-
lucidity of your mind, that's example wisdom. Through cultivating that,
eventually you come to a decisive, direct insight into buddha nature; this
is the actual wisdom. In any case, through resting in the meditative state,
when the instantaneous mind arises from the all-basis consciousness, some
liberation from the process of delusion becomes possible, simply because
it will not continue and will not degenerate into coarse or fully manifest
delusion.
For delusion to diminish, mindfulness and alertness have to be main-
tained. But at the same time, thoughts are the natural display of the mind,
so this does not mean that thoughts of attachment, aversion, and bewilder-
ment will not continue to arise. They will. But, if there is sufficient mind-
fulness and alertness, then upon their arising their nature will be recog-
nized, and so will not be a cause for the accumulation of karma. The initial
thought, being liberated through recognition, will not produce a second
thought and a third thought. In other words, thoughts continue to arise as
the mind's display, but they do not become the cause of the accumulation
of further habits. The metaphor for this in the text is that of a vase with a
hole in the bottom. Although you can still pour water into the vase, you
will never be able to fill it. Everything that is poured in just flows right
back out again. Similarly, when this kind of mindfulness and alertness are
maintained, although thoughts come into the mind, they go right back out
of it. If you can practice in this way, then gradually experience and realiza-
tion will occur. The text treats this in some detail, but I have explained the
essential point.
135



Creation on Completion
How To PRACTICE
Next the text talks about how to actually practice. First of all, the essence
of the completion-stage practice is to rest in that natural lucidity or aware-
ness that characterizes the mind. If you rest in that without fabrication,
even though external appearances will still appear to you, they will occur as
appearances without any substance-as empty. This is the fundamental or
essential practice of the completion stage according to the Vajrayana.
Within Vajrayana there are, broadly speaking, four classes of tantra.
Within the highest there are three subdivisions, which are sometimes
called the father tantra of method, the mother tantra of knowledge, and the
nondual tantra of the essential meaning. The text says that from the father
tantra and from the mahayoga on upward, i.e., for the three higher tantras
(among the six tantras), there is a characteristic recognition that everything
that appears, even samsaric appearances, is the natural display of the mind
and therefore partakes of its essential purity. This view fundamentally disa
tinguishes what are called the higher tantras from the lower.
How do you actually meditate in this way? I have explained how the
eight consciousnesses function. The arising of thoughts within the mind is
continuous and inexhaustible because of this functioning. Thoughts of
past, present, and future continually arise in your mind, like waves on the
surface of a body of water. While mind itself has no substance whatsoever,
it manifests as an inexhaustible appearance, especially as the inexhaustible
appearance or emergence of thoughts. The practice consists simply of not
following thoughts but of resting your mind in shamata or vipashyana, in
the creation-stage visualization, or in the completion stage itself-whatever
your technique is. As for how you rest your mind, it needs to be in a way
that is appropriate to your situation at that time, and this concerns the
issue of effort, of the balance between effort and relaxation.
Sometimes you will find that you have a problem with fatigue in medi-
tation. Typically, if fatigue is a problem, you will find that at the begin-
ning of a meditation session the practice goes well, and by the end it
becomes difficult. That indicates that your mind is too tight and you are
becoming exhausted. The solution in that case is to relax. At other times
you will find that the meditation session begins badly but goes well toward
the end. In that case it indicates lack of effort. The solution is to try a little
bit harder; to put more effort into it. At other times you'll find that the
136



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
balance is fairly even throughout the session. In this case no adjustments
should be made.
The key to being able to attend properly is the application of mindful-
ness, which keeps us from forgetting what we are doing. When you lack
mindfulness, then you become distracted and forget the object of medita-
tion. When you apply mindfulness, then this forgetfulness does not occur.
Mindfulness in general is simply the faculty of memory, which is a normal
mental arising. However, in this case, it is applied in a very specific and
conscious way. By applying the faculty of memory as mindfulness, one's
medication remains free from error or deviation. The manner of applica-
tion is to establish a gentle, watchful mindfulness. A mindfulness that is
gentle and watchful means an alert mindfulness that is just enough. In
other words, there is just enough intentional effort that you do not become
distracted. If you maintain that, then over time the recognition of the lucid
nature of mind will occur.
During this practice, however, a subtle problem can arise called "the
dregs of mind" or the "dregs of awareness.” This is the presence of subtle
thoughts running through your mind even though your mind is basically
at rest and there are no fully conscious thoughts present. These subtle
thoughts are also called the undercurrent," because they are an almost
undetected current of thought that runs on a barely conscious level. The
undercurrent is in fact a greater problem for meditation chan either torpor
or excitement and cannot be allowed to continue on its own. The solution
to the problem of the undercurrent is to tighten up your mind a little bit;
to bring out or enhance the lucidity of your mind, to strengthen or tough-
en the edge of your awareness. As important as being undistracted is, it is
very difficult to develop a state of meditation for long periods of time in
which you are never distracted. The reason this is difficult is lack of train-
ing. It is not particularly that we are doing it wrong, it is that we need to
practice meditation a great deal in order to develop this level of freedom
from distraction. So if you find that you still become distracted, don't be
discouraged, just continue.
Typically your practice of meditation begins with shamata; this is true
especially in the Kagyu tradition of mahamudra. We find in all texts of
mahamudra instruction that one is to begin with establishing a stability or
tranquility of mind as a basis for the emergence of the recognition of the
137



Creation & Completion
mind's nature. However, in the uncommon branch of the tradition of
dzogchen, there is a slightly different approach, wherein instead of taking
mind as path, one takes awareness as the path. In taking awareness as path,
if at the beginning one succeeds in correctly identifying or recognizing riga
or awareness, then it is not, strictly speaking, necessary to begin with the
practice of shamata, because the recognition of awareness has already been
gained. One can simply rest in that and cultivate that. However, if there is
no decisive and correct recognition of awareness, there is no way to go on
with this path. Thus, for most practitioners it is essential to begin with
shamata, as is done in the mahamudra tradition, so that there is a basis of
tranquility in the mind that facilitates the emergence of that recognition.
The text advises at this point that when you are practicing in solitude,
you should relax the mind and allow it to naturally come to rest in its own
nature. When others are around and you might tend more to become dis-
tracted, you should exert more effort and strengthen the lucidity and alert-
ness of your mindfulness. It is not really the case that mindfulness and
alertness are actual things that are present within the mind; they are more
accurately faculties or processes of mind. Nevertheless, although they are
faculties or processes, they do affect very much the state of the mind in
meditation.
QUESTION: Could you please say more about how to tighten up our minds
and toughen the edge of our awareness?
RINPOCHE: Essentially the tough edge or sharp edge of awareness is what is
meant by effort in meditation. Sometimes when we meditate, we practice
it and experience it as conscious relaxation of the mind. At other times
meditation involves a conscious and hard-headed refusal not to become
distracted—the attitude, “I must not become distracted." At different
emphasize one or the other of these. When one slackens
and needs to exert more effort, then one sharpens one's awareness through
this hard-headed intention, which is the refusal to space out.
QUESTION: Is there any reason why one particular gate would provide the
undercurrent, the dregs of mind? My undercurrent is music. There is
always music going on in my mind. I will be meditating for several min-
utes and then discover I'm listening to Ninety-Nine Bortles of Beer.
138



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
RINPOCHE: It is probably happening either because of a strong, deeply-
placed habit or because you like music a lot. The solution in either case is
to generate the strong resolution, "I'm meditating now, not listening to
music. I refuse to listen to this." If you resolve to cut your attachment to it,
and if you actually do not want it to be there, then you can stop it.
QUESTION: It goes on before I'm aware of its going on. The only method I
have found is to maintain a kind of steady sound in my mind as I'm medi-
tating, to tie up that faculty so it doesn't produce music.
RINPOCHE: In that case it is because you are very attached to the experience
of sound. Your mind is habituated to producing a replica of sound so that
you can remember it, so that you can think about it. Therefore it does it
even when you haven't particularly told it to.
QUESTION: The text on page 55 says that "it is impossible for thoughts of
attachment and aversion not to arise. However, if you rely on mindful
awareness, discursive thoughts cannot accumulate karma." Could you
explain that?
RINPOCHE: The idea is that even as you maintain mindfulness and alert-
ness, thoughts of attachment, aversion, and bewilderment will still arise
because the habits that produce their arising have not yet been completely
eradicated. Nevertheless, if you have some recognition of your mind's
nature, then, when any one of those thoughts arises, you will experience
the mind's true nature in that thought, because the mind's nature is also
the nature of that thought. It is the display of that mind. Therefore, when
you realize that, whatever the initial content of that thought may be, it is
liberated. It will not produce a second thought that's connected with it. In
that way the karmic chain of thoughts is broken.
The phrase, "although it is impossible for thoughts of attachment and
aversion not to arise," refers to that point in one's training at which one
has some recognition of the mind's nature but has not yet reached the
ultimate state of liberation. When one reaches the ultimate state of libera-
tion, the kleshas are exhausted and will not arise at all. For a beginner
(someone who has some recognition of the mind's nature but is not yet
fully liberated), these thoughts will still arise, but they need not be
allowed to accumulate karma.
139



Creation
Completion
QUESTION: If the thought is an angry thought, what happens?
RINPOCHE: You don't accumulate karma just through one thought of
anger. You accumulate karma when anger ripens and festers into spiteful-
ness. For example, when you simply see someone who bothers you and
you experience a thought of aversion, if you don't carry it any further, then
you don't accumulate karma. You accumulate karma when that transient
thought of aversion leads to the actual thought I would really like to beat
up that person. I'd like to kill him." Then you accumulate karma.
QUESTION: The normal or the conventional method of distinguishing sen-
tient beings is by their physical basis, their bodies. If what we take as a
physical object is merely lucidity and emptiness, what is it that distinguish-
es different sentient beings?
RINPOCHE: Sentient beings are distinguished by their individual minds,
which are not objects of your experience and therefore are not projections
of your mind. The bodies of sentient beings are things you can see and are
therefore projections of your mind.
QUESTION: Is there a space that minds exist in?
RINPOCHE: Basically what happens is that beings who have performed
enough actions in common with other beings will come to experience the
world in a way that is similar enough to all that it can be an agreed-upon
reality. For example, you and I are likely to agree upon what we see in this
room because we have gathered the types of karma that cause us to have
similar types of physical perceptions.
QUESTION: Sometimes when I'm meditating, I perceive a major denseness,
a kind of fog. It doesn't feel like fatigue. I even feel it on the top of my
head. I'll conk out and then I'll come back. Eventually by my just persist-
ing, it leaves. What is that?
RINPOCHE: That kind of a feeling of denseness, which is not uncommon,
is one of a class of meditation experiences that come under the general cat-
egory of torpor.
QUESTION: If I don't have time during the day to meditate, and during the
evening after I've helped my wife put the children to bed, I'm feeling a little



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
tired, is it better to go ahead and rest or to try to work through that feeling
of tiredness and practice at least for fifteen or twenty minutes?
RINPOCHE: It depends on exactly how tired you are. If you're just slightly
exhausted then try to meditate, but if you're utterly exhausted then go
to sleep.
QUESTION: I read that one should not exhaust oneself with things that are
not going to be of benefit, but to me practice is of great benefit. That was
the point of my question.
RINPOCHE: The most important thing to understand about exertion in
practice is that the long term is more important than the short term. It is
not as important to make a heroic effort on a given day to practice when
you are exhausted as it is to practice steadily over a long time.
Cultivating Lucidity
So far, in discussing the completion stage, I have talked principally about
one aspect of it. However, there are two aspects to the completion stage,
two ends we are trying to accomplish. One is to discover or generate
some tranquillity or stability in the mind. The second is to generate
clarity or lucidity in the mind. The practice of generating stability is
shamata meditation, and the practice of generating clarity or lucidity is
vipashyana meditation. The significance of shamata is that, for as long as
your mind is not at rest, there will be no clarity; there will be no lucidity.
Therefore it seems necessary to practice shamata before one engages in
the practice of vipashyana. As I have explained, however, in certain tradi-
tions, especially in certain aspects of dzogchen practice, there is the
notion that because in that approach one takes awareness rather than
mind as the path, it is not, strictly speaking, necessary to precede the
practice of dzogchen with the practice of shamata. However, in that case,
the practice depends entirely upon an authentic recognition of the
mind's nature. Although the instructions for generating that recognition
in the dzogchen tradition are especially profound, they will not necessarily
work for someone who has not yet produced a stable state of shamata.
Therefore, while it is theoretically unnecessary to precede the practice of
dzogchen with the practice of shamata, practically speaking, for most
141



Creation & Completion
people it is helpful to begin with shamata practice, which will enable one
to generate a clear recognition.
Now I am going to talk about the vipashyana aspect of the completion
stage, the cultivation of lucidiry. In this text, the practice of cultivaring
lucidity is said to have two main aims: no meditation and no distraction.
By “no meditation," we mean that there is no fabrication in the practice.
One is not thinking, "I am meditating on this." One is not attempting to
determine what one discovers in meditation. One does not tell oneself that
the mind is empty and that therefore one will discover emptiness, or that
the mind is lucid and that therefore one will discover lucidity. In this prac-
tice you simply see your mind as it is, and thus come to know it as it is.
This lack of fabrication in the practice is what is meant by no meditation.
On the other hand, it is possible to misunderstand this. When we say no
meditation, you might understand this to mean allowing the state of ordi-
nary distraction to continue. Therefore, along with no meditation one has
to say no distraction. "No distraction" means that although there is no fab-
rication of some meditative state or realization, there is a maintenance of
mindfulness and alertness. The function of mindfulness and alertness in
this context is to protect one from being distracted from the recognition of
the mind's nature. In that state one simply stays with the direct experience
of whatever arises in the mind.
DIFFERENT APPROACHES
There are two ways that this meditation can be presented to students. One
way is through a sudden pointing out of the nature of the mind. This
could occur, for example, in the context of pointing out the nature of
thought. When this is done, then some students have a recognition of the
mind's nature and some do not. But the recognition, as authentic as it is, is
in some ways adulterated by conceptualization and therefore remains an
experience rather than a realization. The problem with this is that, while
the recognition is authentic as far as it goes, because it is incomplete and
imperfect, it will at some point vanish. When it vanishes, the student does
not know how to bring it back, because their initial recognition was expe-
rienced under the dramatic circumstances of receiving the pointing out
from their guru. Therefore, in the Kagyu tradition, we take a slightly dif-
ferent approach. We use two situations of mind-abiding (the mind that
142



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
rests) and moving the presence of thought within the mind)—to enable
students, through their own exploration, to come to a decisive recognition
of the mind's nature. Students are taught first to look at the mind when it
is still, and see how it is then, and next to look at the mind when thought
occurs, and see how it is then. In that way they come to realize for them-
selves what the mind is like when it is at rest and what it is like when it is
moving, or when there is thought. This leads to a more stable recognition
of the mind's nature—a recognition that will not disappear, or even if it
does, can easily be brought back by students because they gained it through
their own exploration.
In the Kagyu tradition, this basic format of presentation of the mind's
nature is called "abiding, moving, and awareness." With this approach,
some students will recognize the mind's nature and some will not, but it is
still the most stable and the best way to proceed. The basic idea is
expressed in this text by the phrase, "To stay with whatever arises is the
path of all siddhas," which means that, resting in an unfabricated way, you
maintain an awareness of what arises in your mind. That is the path by
means of which all have attained siddhi.
This practice of stabilizing the mind and attaining insight into what
arises is the one root of all of the different approaches to meditation.
Historically in Tiber the Vajrayana spread at different times. Therefore dif-
ferent lineages arose, each having their own specific emphasis and instruc-
tion. For example, there is the Middle Way school, which also teaches this
approach to meditation. Then there is the school called pacification, which
is the school of Padampa Sangye, who came to Tibet from India three
times and each time taught something slightly different from before. So
even within the school of pacification, three different approaches are
taught. Then, connected with that, there is the approach called severance,
which was taught by the great female disciple of Padampa Sangye, Machig
Labdron, who was Tibetan. Based on the instructions she had received
from him, and even more on her own spontaneous correct understanding
of the prajnaparamita sutras, she started her own school, which has its dis-
tinct approach to meditation. There is also the mahamudra tradition,
which was taught most typically by lords Marpa, Milarepa, and Gampopa.
Then the dzogchen tradition, which was taught principally by Guru
Rinpoche and by Vimalamitra. Within dzogchen there are two basic



Creation & Completion
approaches: one called the common or ordinary dzogchen, which is very
similar to mahamudra, and the other called uncommon or extraordinary
dzogchen, which I discussed in part in the previous section.
The major distinction between all of these traditions lies between com-
mon and uncommon drogchen. Dzogchen includes three classes of
instruction. These are called the mind, space, and instruction classes,
Uncommon dzogchen refers to the instruction class, which is considered by
that tradition to be che highest level of instruction. Within that there is the
essence of the instruction class, called the heart-drop or nying tig teachings.
The distinction made in this text between the nying thig approach and
that of these other meditative traditions is very subtle, and concerns what
you do when a thought arises. In most traditions of meditation, as I have
explained, when a thought arises, you look directly at that thought and
thereby directly experience its empty nature. However, in the nying thig
tradition, when a thought arises, rather than looking directly at the nature
of the thought, you look directly at the nature of that which recognizes the
thought's arising. This is obviously a very subtle distinction, but the idea is
that by looking directly at the nature of that, or who, or what, recognizes
the thought's arising, you directly encounter dharmata, the nature of all
things. In the former instance, there is a slight sense of your awareness
being directed outward at thought; and in the latter, there is a slight sense
of its being directed inward back at itself. At this point you are relating to
this distinction as theoretical understanding. It's not difficult to under-
stand intellectually the difference between these two ways of looking, but
the important thing, since this is meditation instruction, is to actually
practice this. Whether you are looking at what arises or looking at that
which recognizes what arises, in order to understand what the two
approaches mean, you need to actually have attempted them. You need to
attempt them again and again until you actually experience them, because
the difference between them is profound.
Once you have gained some experience through actually practicing the
instructions found in this text, then you can go back and study the text
again and see how your experience compares with what you find in the
text. Thus, by combining practical experience with the learning you have
gained from studying this and similar texts, what you learn from this text
will actually become useful to you as a practitioner. In this way the trans-
144



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
mission of instructions has been kept as a lineage of practical experience
rather than simply a lineage of transmitted information.
EVALUATING OUR PROCESS
After further analysis of the three classes of instruction, the text discusses
how to determine the degree of progress in meditation. It says that there is
an external and an internal aspect to the samadhi that develops as you
progress in practice. The external aspect, or the external sign of progress, is
that you do not become distracted. The internal sign is that, not being in
danger of distraction, you can relax. As a beginner, in order not to become
distracted, you have to exert tremendous effort. As you go on it will take less
and less effort, and this is the sign of progress. Therefore, what is called "no
meditation," which is the final stage of meditation, is the exhaustion of the
need for any effort. So the term "no meditation," in that context, means no
need for intentional meditation. This is true because, in a sense, there is
nothing to be meditated upon. However, there is something to be gotten
used to. There being nothing to meditate upon means that meditation upon
the nature of things is not the fabrication of any specific meditation experi-
ence. As we saw before, it is not pretending that what exists does not exist,
or that what does not exist, exists. It is simply seeing things as they are.
Meditation on the nature of things is simply seeing your mind as it is.
However, there is a process of getting used to seeing it as it is, and therefore
there is a process of cultivation or training. In order that this process contin-
ue, in order that there be progress in meditation, it is of the utmost impor-
tance that you not allow yourself to become distracted from the recognition
of your mind's nature, not only during formal meditation sessions, but as
much as possible in post-meditation as well. When you are eating, lying
down, walking, sitting around, talking, whatever you are doing, you should
try to maintain mindfulness of the fundamental nature of your activity.
MIND AND AWARENESS
Next the text gives two sets of parallel instructions. The first comes from
the dzogchen tradition, and the second comes from the Kagyu mahamudra
tradition. The instruction from the dzogchen tradition reveals the essential
point that makes this instruction section of the atiyoga or dzogchen teach-
ings unique: distinguishing berween mind and awareness. In the context of
145



Creation & Completion
that tradition, the term mind is used to refer to what we would normally
call thought or deluded mind. Awareness is used to refer to the innate non-
conceptual cognitive lucidity of the mind. The point made in this tradi-
tion is that it is of great importance in meditation to properly distinguish
between these two in your meditation experience. Since mindfulness, as a
mental process, is a function of mind, intentional mindfulness itself cannot
recognize the nature of mind. Mindfulness, as useful as it is, contains some
conceptual dregs or impurities. The actual recognition of the nature of
mind is distinct from mindfulness. It is a cognition without object, a cog-
nition that is recognizing or experiencing itself.
To be more precise about this distinction between mind and awareness,
mindfulness can be of two types. There is a kind of conceptual or inten-
tional heavy-handed mindfulness that is a function of mind, and there is a
kind of subtle mindfulness that is characteristic of awareness. The distinc-
tion is that the faculty of mindfulness that you use in your meditation is
incapable of recognizing the mind's nature insofar as it tends to objectify
what it experiences. When it seems to be experiencing something other
than itself and therefore has that sediment of conceptualization, that is
mind. When the faculty you are experiencing in meditation has no object
other than itself, experiences its own nature as light, and has the character-
istic of brilliant clarity, like a lamp flame, then that is awareness. The key
point is that it has no object. Mind always has an object. Awareness does
not have an object. The experience of awareness is like being frightened or
terrified. It is that kind of intense nonconceptual experience. When you
have recognized this, when awareness arises in your experience and you
recognize awareness as awareness, then you will have certainty about what
all of this means.
Such an experiential presentation of reality, as mentioned in the text, is
very different from a theoretical presentation. The distinction between the
two is the heart's blood of the lineage. It is the single key point and so is
considered quite precious and rare. Therefore, the text admonishes one not
to discuss the teachings with those who have broken samaya or who just
talk about meditation. One may talk about these matters to people who
actually practice meditation, but a distinction needs to be made between
those who practice and those who just want to acquire jargon in order to
impress others.
146



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
MAHAMUDRA
Next Jamgön Lodrö Thaye presents meditation instructions from the
mahamudra tradition, the Kagyu tradition. When in your practice you are
attempting to have a continuous recognition of dharmata, of the nature of
your mind, it is crucial that this be unfabricated. The mahamudra tradition
counsels you not to try to force the recognition of it. If you do, you will
have a momentary recognition of dharmata, and then you will try to
adhere to it with force and vigor. That will not help. It is actually suffi-
cient, according to the teachers of the Kagyu tradition, to have had that
momentary glimpse of it. If you try to prolong it, you will only create a
fabricated similitude of that experience. In any instant of actual meditation
on the nature of mind, you are purifying the negative karma you have
accumulated over innumerable eons. An instant of meditation on this
nature causes all of your karmic winds to enter the central channel. In
short, there is no limit to the benefit of this kind of recognition
While you can't force it, nevertheless this kind of recognition of your
own nature is the one thing that matters. In the Kagyu terminology, it is
"the one thing, if known, that frees all." Another, related phrase is "know-
ing all, but missing out on the one." If you recognize your mind's nature,
then that in itself is the recognition of the essence of everything else that is
to be known. But if you don't recognize your mind's nature, no matter
how much else you may know about Dharma, you are missing the point.
Next the text gives instructions for a method of enhancing one's medi-
tation practice that is called “mixing of awareness and space." Essentially
this consists of either looking into the midst of the sky or into the midst of
a large body of water, such as an ocean, and mixing your awareness with
where you are looking. By doing this mindfully, with some vigor to your
mindfulness, you will have an experience of limitless awareness that is
without substantiality; awareness without center or limit.
THE THREE STATES
Following that, the text addresses the question of how to determine what is
happening in your meditation. Specifically, one might mistake any of the
three meditation states for one another, because superficially they may
resemble one another. These three states are the recognition or experience
of emptiness, i.e., the states of vipashyana, shamata, and blank neutrality.
147



Creation - Completion
The experience of emptiness is occurring when there is a direct experience of
or by your awareness that you cannot conceptualize. You cannot actually say
it is one thing or another. You can't describe it to yourself; it is inexpressible.
The experience of shamata, in contrast, is a state in which all of the agitation
of thought is completely pacified, and there is a limitless experience of
peace, stillness, and tranquillity. It is like a body of water without waves.
The experience of neutrality is different from these two in that your
faculties of mindfulness, alertness, and awareness are weak. There is a feel-
ing of obscurity. Neutrality differs from the experience of emptiness in the
lack of recognition or direct experience. It differs from shamata in that
there is some undercurrent of thought that is very subtle, that distracts
you, that you only recognize after you have become distracted. So if there's
a feeling of basic stillness but you are still being distracted by some under-
current, that is neither emptiness nor shamata, but neutrality.
Of these three states, the realization of emptiness is what we are
attempting to achieve, but shamata is also acceptable, especially if that is
what you are trying to cultivate. If you are trying to practice shamata, then
a state of shamata itself is not regarded as a defect, although a distinction
needs to be made between a state of shamata and a state of realization.
However, the third of these states, the blank neutrality in which the under-
current is functioning, needs to be rectified. The way to rectify that is to
recognize it and to strengthen or tighten up your awareness, to put more
effort into mindfulness and into alertness and awareness. There is a partic-
ular variety of neutrality in which you have a feeling of dense obscurity or
thickness to your mind, like being in a fog. That can be dispelled by vigor-
ously breathing out all the scale air in your body and then breathing in.
Other techniques such as the verbal repetition of mantras—the actual use
of speech—and sometimes physical movement, can also dispel it.
Having recognized the presence of neutrality in your meditation, it
needs to be overcome. There are steps for accomplishing this. The first is
learning to distinguish neutrality—especially from shamata, but also from
insight. The second is learning to recognize neutrality when it is occurring.
The third is learning methods to get rid of it. Sometimes the state of neu-
trality afflicts our meditation, but at other times our meditation is imped-
ed not by neutrality but by the presence of actual kleshas. So next the text
explains how to deal with the kleshas that arise in meditation.
148



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
The klesha that is used as an example is anger. The reason that anger is
used is because it is the easiest klesha to recognize, because it is the most
vivid. When a thought of anger vividly arises in your mind, which through
its intensity is easy to apprehend, look at it directly. Looking at it directly
does not mean distancing yourself from it and looking at it theoretically or
conceptually. When you conceptually examine kleshas from a distance, you
are considering the characteristics and contents of the thought, creating the
semblance of something there. You have an idea of who you are angry at,
how you feel about them, and so on. That is not looking at anger directly. If
you look at it nakedly or directly with nothing in between that which is
looking and that which is looked at, then you will see the nature of it rather
than the mere appearance of something there. When you look direccy and
rest within that looking without fabrication, without attempting to tell
yourself anything about the anger, then the heavy-handed quality of the
anger dissolves on the spot, and the thought is seen to have no benefit or
harm. It no longer has any kind of negative energy.
QUESTION: What is the distinction between the teachings received by
Machig Labdron and her own direct experience?
RINPOCHE: The difference between Machig's teachings and the teachings
that she received from India is that the teachings that came from India take
the approach of pacifying thought and delusion and letting it settle down,
whereas Machig's approach, called severance, is very aggressive. Not aggres-
sive in a negative way, but aggressive in the sense of "aggressively treating
an illness." It is just slicing through thoughts--not waiting for them to set-
tle down, but slicing through them or destroying them. The words "pacifi-
cation" and "severance" themselves describe the difference. Rather than
pacifying thoughts, you actually provoke the most difficult ones. In sever-
ance practice, you work especially with fear. You go to places where you
feel unsafe, typically to charnel grounds. You trigger intense fear, and you
cut through it.
QUESTION: My question concerns the arising of thoughts and directly expe-
riencing them. When anger comes up for me, the next feeling or thought
that comes up is guilt. Do I just keep on looking at these as they arise?
RINPOCHE: It doesn't matter what the thought is. While the thought of
149



Creation
Completion
anger is present, you can look directly at the thought of anger; if it is suc-
ceeded by a thought of guilt, you can look at the thought of guilt. In either
case, what you discover when you look directly at a thought is that
although there is something you can experience that you can call a
thought-a feeling of anger--when you look at it directly, there is nothing
there. Hence this is called the unity of clarity and emptiness. Clarity is the
fact that there is an appearance or experience but it has no substantial exis-
tence. Thoughts are all the same. They are just like water bubbles. You see
them, but then there is nothing there.
QUESTION: In the sutra tradition of the middle way, are there analytical
medications that specifically reveal the luminous nature of mind?
RINPOCHE: Not directly, because in analytical meditation you are always
concerned with the maintenance and cultivation of some kind of convic-
tion. Therefore it is very indirect. It takes a long time. If you persisted long
enough with the maintenance and refinement of your conviction about the
nature of mind, eventually there could be a discovery of the mind's innate
lucidity, but it is not directly discussed in the sutra system.
QUESTION: Why are yidam practices done by accomplished realized
beings? And why are empowerments given, such as the Kalachakra, that
are so extensive and detailed that it would be very hard for me or other
people like me to actually do?
TRANSLATOR: Those are two very different questions: Why people who
have already attained enlightenment continue to do yidam practice, and
why empowerments for yidam practice are given to people who are unlike-
ly ever to do that yidam practice.
RINPOCHE: In answer to the first question, there are many different types
of teachers, and they are not all necessarily at the same level, so it would be
difficult to give a single answer for why they all would continue to do these
practices. In the case of some of them, they do so because they still have
some distance to go on the path; they do so for their own benefit, to
expand their experience and realization. In the case of others who have
already attained supreme siddhi, who in fact may be fully awakened
buddhas, they continue to do formal practice as an example to others, to
show the importance of formal practice.
ISO



Commentary by Khenchen Thrange Rinpoche
In answer to the second question, giving empowerments has two aspects.
One is called "actual" or "ultimate" empowerment, and the other is called
"external" or "symbolic" empowerment. In the case of actual empower-
ment-what nowadays we would call an "extraordinary* empowerment-
what happens is that the student actually recognizes on the spot the wis-
dom that that empowerment is designed to communicate. That is the
fullest or most extraordinary instance of empowerment. It is not a particu-
larly different type or ceremony of empowerment; it is a specific experience
of empowerment.
Normally when an empowerment is given, the function is not only to
empower people to do specific practices but to transmit the blessing of
Dharma through the vehicle of that specific ceremony. In that spirit you
might take the empowerment of Kalachakra or of Chakrasamvara or of
Hevajra, or any other major or minor empowerment. The basic process of
these is essentially the same: Some kind of blessing of Dharma is actually
entering into you. To say that the blessing of Dharma enters into you
does not mean that through receiving an empowerment you can immedi-
ately fly in the sky, or that you become intoxicated with some kind of
mysterious spiritual drunkenness. It means simply that having received
the empowerment, something changes. There will be at least a little
increase in your faith and devotion, at least a little increase in your dili-
gence. These changes in you are the principal blessing or benefit of the
empowerment process. For example, many people have told me that they
were previously unable to understand or settle on the validity of
Buddhism, but then, for one reason or another, they received the Kala-
chakra empowerment from His Holiness the Dalai Lama and thereafter
have been intensely involved in practice. That is an instance of the bless-
ing of empowerment. It is not necessarily that they are practicing
Kalachakra, but that, because of that empowerment, they are practicing
Dharma.
QUESTION: In the sudden pointing out of the nature of mind versus abid-
ing, moving, and awareness, you refer to the second technique as being
specifically the Kagyu approach. Is there some flexibility in terms of how
specific teachers deal with specific students?
RINPOCHE: Sure. There are different texts composed by different teachers,
ISI



Creation
Completion
and present-day teachers following these different texts therefore guide
their students slightly differently.
QUESTION: On page 69 the phrase appears, "three things are said to pose
the danger of misunderstanding." What does danger” refer to?
TRANSLATOR: The Tibetan says, "there is the possibility of mistaking one of
these for another.” The word that is translated as “danger" here, nor dogs,
means something that possibly might happen.
QUESTION: What are the ten winds?
RINPOCHE: These are the five main and five minor energies or winds of the
body. The five major winds govern the principal physical processes. They
are called the digestive wind; the eliminating wind, which is connected with
going to the bathroom; the upward moving wind; the pervasive wind, which
enables you to move your limbs; and the life wind or prana wind, which
keeps you alive, keeps you in your body.
QUESTION: When the winds enter the central channel, is it one or all of
them that enter?
RINPOCHE: There are two mentions of this in our text. When it says "the
ten winds become workable," it means that, as a sign of practice, they start
to function in an ideal way. Generally speaking, the karmic energy or wind
flows through the two side channels, the ones on the right and left of the
central channel. The winds or energies that flow in the central channel are
wisdom winds, nor karmic winds. Through the cessation of the flowing of
winds through the right and left channels, which brings the winds into the
central channel, there is a transformation of karmic wind into wisdom
wind. This is what the text refers to when it talks about the karmic wind
being brought into the central channel. It occurs as a natural result of
meditation, and there are specific methods to achieve it.
QUESTION: How do the karmic winds that become wisdom winds relate to
the five major winds that you named before?
RINPOCHE: The ten winds are the energies of your physical body that
enable it to do all the things it does. The karmic wind is actually what you
breathe in and out. The point is that the karmic wind that you breathe in
152



Commentary by Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
and out has a little bit of wisdom wind mixed with it all the time. There-
fore, especially at certain times, there is a presence of wisdom wind in your
breathing. Through the practice of meditation in general and through cer-
tain specific processes or techniques, you can cause the karmic wind to be
transformed into wisdom wind.
QUESTION: As the breath comes in or...?
RINPOCHE: Normally, as the breath is held, which is why there is the
practice of holding the breath. The text talks about this also occurring as a
natural result of meditative realization. Some people, if they develop an
extraordinary state of shamata, have the experience of not having to
breathe for a while.
QUESTION: On page 77 the text discusses breathing HUNG AH OM. Which
is recited on the out, the pause, and the in-breath?
RINPOCHE: In this text, when you breath out, it is HUNG. Between breath-
ing out and the next breathing in, it is AH. So the breath is actually held
out rather than held in. Then, when you breathe in again, it is om. In
other teachings, the sequence sometimes varies.
153



Notes
1. rdzogs: I have used "completion" rather than "perfection" since it
seems to imply a sense of wholeness and inclusion, whereas perfection
might connote a ching perfected due to the elimination of its imperfect
parts. In the case of dzogchen (see note 54) however, I have used "great
perfection," which is in common usage by now, even though "great
completion" might have been better. The reader should understand
that the term in Tibetan is the same in both cases.
2. Sakyamuni means "the sage of the Shakya clan," and is the name usu-
ally used when distinguishing the historical Buddha from other bud-
dhas. His personal name was Gautama or Siddhartha. The dates of his
life are generally given as 563 to 483 B.C.E., although various traditions
offer a number of different datings. There are also many different per-
spectives on his life, the so-called historical version being only one pos-
sible interpretation.
3. byang chub, Skr. bodhi: the Tibetan term means purification (byang) of
all obscurations, and realization (chub) of all qualities.
4. thabs mkhas pa, Skt. upaya.
chos 'khor rim pa gsum, Skt, triparivartadharmacakrapravartana: the
early, the middle, and the last (snga bar phyi gsum) "turnings of the
wheel of Dharma" are called, respectively, the Dharma turning of the
four truths (bden pa bzhii chas 'khor); of absence of defining character-
istics (mtshan nyid med pa'i chos 'khor); and of thorough distinction
(legs par rnam par phye ba i chos khor). The wheel is a metaphoric ref-
erence to the legendary universal king whose instrument of sovereignty
is a wheel that subdues any territory without violence.
*6. phags pa'i bden pa bzhi, Skt. catvāryasatya: first recorded in the first
sermon of the Buddha, Dharmacakrapravartana Sūtra, "Setting in
Motion the Wheel of Dharma."
7. rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba, Skr. pratītyasamutpâda: the interdependent
relationship, or " dependent origination," that is the nature of all phe-
nomena. This idea is at the core of all Buddhist philosophy.
155



Creation
Completion
wwwwwwwwwww
8.
nyon mongs pa, Skt. kleſa: the definition in the Great Tibetan
Dictionary (bod kyi tshig mdzod chen mo) is: "mental events that incite
one to unvirtuous actions and cause one's being to be very disturbed,"
(mi dge bal las bakul bas rang ngyud rab tu ma chi bar byed par sems
byung), vol. 2, p. 970. The three main afflictive emotions, or "poi-
sons," are desire, hatred, and stupidity.
9. bdag med, Skt. anātman.
10. dgra bcom pa: one who has conquered (bcom) the enemy (dgra) of
afflictive emotion.
II. shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pai mdo sde, Skt. prajñāpäramitāsürra: the
teachings on the perfection of transcendent intelligence first appeared
in India beginning around 100 B.C.E., according to Edward Conze.
There are about forty texts, varying in size from 100,000 verses to a
single letter: A. They represent the evolution of the emphasis on
emptiness and compassion.
12. stong pa nyid, Skt. sünyata and snying rje, Skr. karuna.
13. don dam bden pa, Skt. paramärthasarya.
14. kun rdzob bden pa, Skt. samvítisatya these two truths (bden pa gyis,
Skt. satyadvaya), the absolute and the relative, are to be understood as
inseparable.
IS. byang chub sems dpa, Skt. bodhisattva: "hero of awakening," the ideal
Mahāyāna paradigm, who is completely devoted to the awakening of
all sentient beings.
16. de bzhin gshegs par snying po, Skt. tathāgatagarbha; or bde bar gshegs pa'i
snying po, Skt. sugatagarbha: literally, "the essence or womb of the one
gone to suchness (or bliss)," in other words, a buddha.
17. Sūtras (mdo) are the discourses attributed to the Buddha Säkyamuni.
They include the early teachings spoken directly by the Buddha, col-
lected and preserved in the Pali canon during the early Buddhist coun-
cils, and texts that appeared much later, usually in Sanskrit, Prakrit, or
Buddhist-hybrid Sanskrit, that are attributed to the influence of the
Buddha and included in the Mahāyāna canon.
18. ud, "continuity": refers both to the class of literature, both Hindu
and Buddhist, and the teachings contained in that literature.
19. rdo rje theg pa, Skt. vajrayana.
20. gsang sngags, Skt. guhyamantra.
21. dag snang the vision or outlook that recognizes the innate perfection
or purity of all phenomena. In tantra, this means specifically regarding
all beings as deities, the surroundings as the pure lands of the
I56



Notes
buddhas, all sound as mantra, and all thoughts as intrinsic awareness.
Also to always see one's spiritual teacher as a buddha.
22. dkyil 'khor, Skt. mandala: literally, center and circumference. A stylized
configuration of peaceful or wrathful deities, or enlightened attributes,
usually formed by a circle with a four-doored square within, represent-
ing the pure abode of the deities; may also represent the universe, psy-
chic energy centers, and other correspondences.
23. King Trisong Detsen (khri srong Ide bosan) lived from approximately
730 to 798 C.E., although dates vary a great deal according to different
sources and ways of calculating.
24. Santaraksita (zhi ba 'tsho), also called Abbot Bodhisattva (mkhan po bo
dhi sa tva) by Tibetans.
25. pad ma byung gas, Skt. padmakara: “Lotus Born," known more com-
monly in Tibet as Guru Rinpoche, Precious Guru, and many other
names. He was an Indian tantric master considered to be the second
Buddha" and is credited with establishing Buddhism in Tibet and
founding the Ancient (mying ma) lineage.
26. bstan pa snga dar: "the early spreading is also referred to as the snga
bsgyur rnying ma, "the early translation (period of the) Ancient (School]."
27. glang dar ma, who ruled from approximately 841 to 846 C.E.
28. bstan pa phyi dar: also referred to as the phyi bsgyur gsar ma, "the later
translation (period of the) New (School)." Since the Kagyu, Sakya, and
Gelug traditions originated during this period, they are called collec-
tively the "New (Sarma) School."
29. sgrub brgyud shing ra chen po brgyad:"the eight great chariots of prac-
tice lineages, they are the Nyingma (rying ma), Kadam (bka'gdams),
Kagyu (bka' brgyud), Lamdre (lam 'bras, path and fruition, i.e., sa
skya), Shangpa (shangs pa), Shije and Chöd (zhi byed and gcod; " pacifi-
cation and severance”), Kalachakra (dus 'khor; also called sbyor drug),
and Orgyen Nyengyu (orgyan bsnyen brgrud).
30. mdo lam sngags lam, Skt. Sūtramärga and mantramärga: "mantra" being
short for the Secret Mantra Vehicle.
31. sdig pa ci yang mi bya zhing/
dge ba phun sum tshogs par spyad /
rang gi sems ni yongs su 'dul/
di ni sangs rgyas bstan pa yin/
32. bras bu'i theg pa, Skr. phalayāna: which makes the result the path, as
opposed to the Causal Vehicle (rgyu'i theg pa), which makes the cause
the path—a method ascribed to the "lower" approaches.
157



Creation & Completion
33. sbyang gzhi chos dbyings stag brtan 'dus ma byas/
bde gshegs snying pos 'gro kun yongs la khyab/
In Sanskrit, "realm of reality” is dharmadhatu, and "buddha nature" is
sugatagarbha. See page 41.
34stong pa la bdag dang gsal ba la gzhan: "on emptiness ‘self' and on radi-
ance 'other' (is imputed]," from "Kalu Rinpoche's Comments on
Foundation Consciousness, etc." (ka lu rin po che'r kun gzhi sogs khrid)
as well as innumerable oral teachings. The late Kalu Rinpoche was a
supreme meditation master in the Kagyu tradition and lineage holder
of the Shangpa tradition of Tibetan Buddhism. He was said to be a
manifestation of Jamgön Kongtrul.
35. mishan nyid sdug bsngal du shar ba yin: from dam chos yid bzhin nor
bu thar pa rin po che'i rgyan (Jewel Ornament of Liberation) by
Gampopa, f. 2.
36. Korlo Demchog ('khor lo bde mchag, Skt. cakrasamvara), "Wheel of
Sublime Bliss," a name for one of the tantric deities.
37. de yang sbyang gzhi bde gshegs snying po nyid /
rdo rje mtshan dpe gsal rdzogs skur bzhugs pas /
de dang 'dra bai mam pa lam byed kyis /
sbyangs 'bras gzhi la yod pa' lha sku nyid /
See page 47
38. The Ratnagotravibhaga, more popularly known to Tibetans as the
Uttaratantra (rgyud bla ma), a commentary on the ideas of buddha
nature said to be written down by the great third-century Indian
Acarya Asanga (thogs med) through the inspiration of the bodhisattva
and future buddha Maitreya (byams pa).
39. de dag yon tan gsum bcu nil
gnyís 'di chos skus rab phye ste /
nor bu rin chen od mdog dang /
dbyibs bzhin dbye ba med phyir ro /
Uttaratantra, f. 28 b.
40. The three bodies (sku gsum, Skt. trikāya) of a buddha: body of reality
(chos sku Skt. dharmakāya), body of perfect rapture (longs spyod rdzogs
par sku Skt. sambhogakāya), and emanation body (sprul pa' sku, Skt.
nirmänakäya). There are a number of others as well, with similar or
overlapping meanings, but this three-part classification seems to be the
most common.
41. phyag rgya chen po la rgyu med del
dad pa dang mas gus phyag rgya chen po'i rgyu yin/



Notes
43.
phyag rgya chen po la rkyen med de !
bla ma dam pa phyag rgya chen po'i rkyen yin/
from mnyam med rje btsun sgam po par phyag rgya chen po lam gcig
chod, (The Single Decisive Path, the Mahamudră of the Unequalled and
Revered Gampopa) ff. 1b-2. Gampopa was a master in the two lineages
of Tibetan Buddhism, the Kadam and the Kagyu, and is seen as the
founder of the established order of the Kagyu, being the first monk.
Mahamudra (phyag rgya chen po, "the great seal") is the culminating
formless practice in the Kagyu system and is also synonymous with irs
fruition--recognition of ultimate reality.
42. dbang bskur, Skt. abhiseka: the Tibetan term means to transfer power,
especially in the sense of authority to do the practice concerned with the
particular empowerment ceremony. The Sanskrit term means anoint-
ing or consecration. Most deity practices require that the practitioner
first receive a ceremonial empowerment from a qualified master.
There are two classifications of the tantric literature in Tibet, either
according to the Old Translation School (Nyingma), in which case
there are six classes, or the New Translation School (Sarma) (see note
28) with four classes. A thorough discussion in English can be found in
Dudjom Rinpoche's The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism.
44. Tulku Thondup Rinpoche, Buddha Mind: An Anthology of Longchen
Rabjam's Writings on Dzogpa Chenpo, pp. 15–46.
45. These are called the five actual enlightening factors (mngon byang Inga),
four vajras (rdo rje bzhi), three rituals (cho ga gsum), and instanta-
neously complete (skad cig dran rdzogs). Each sequence covers the visu-
alization process in greater or fewer stages, from the initial emptiness
up to the full form of the deity.
46. These five are listed somewhat differently in different places, as
Kongtrul himself notes. For instance, I have found differing lists in
zb mo nang don [f. 41); bde mchog Iha Inga mam bshad; nor bu 'od zer
[f. 40); and Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche's Pure Appearance, pp. 18-30.
Also see note 108.
47. In Khyentse's Pure Appearance, p. 24, the absorption of the cause
includes the visualization of the seed syllable, or consciousness aspect,
whereas here that visualization seems to come after the absorptions.
48. As all mental activity can be recognized as the pure radiance of aware-
ness, the five basic emotions ignorance, desire, anger, pride, and jeal-
ousy—are described as being essentially five aspects of pristine wisdom
(ye shes). They are the wisdoms of the realm of reality (chos dbyings), of
159



Creation
Completion
discrimination (so sor rtog pa), mirror-like (me long lta bu), of sameness
(mnyam nyid), and of accomplishment (bya ba grub pa). These are
also discussed in terms of five families (rigs nga), which are buddha,
lotus, vajra, jewel, and action. Tantric deities are usually manifesta-
tions of one of these energies and are said to belong to that family.
49. blo 'das brjod bral ba; see page Sr.
so. mos gus stobs kyis nang nas shar ba la; see page sı.
SI. The eight aggregates of consciousness (ram shes ashogs brgyad) are the
five associated with the five senses (dbang po Inga), plus the mental
consciousness (sems kyi mnam shes), the afflictive mind (nyon yid), and
the "foundation-of-all" consciousness (kun gzhi mam shes, Skt. älaya-
vijñāna). Kongtrul's explanation in this text is succinct but sufficient.
52. dran pa, (Skt. smrti) or dran shes, “mindful awareness."
53. mthar thug don la dran pa nyid kyang med; see page 7.
54. Dzogchen (rdzogs pa chen po, Skt. mahäsandhi): “the great perfection"
is the highest nonconceptual practice in the Nyingma School of
Tibetan Buddhism and claims itself to be the culmination of all
approaches. It is also called atiyoga, the highest of the six-part
Nyingma division of tantra.
Exceptional esoteric instructions (man ngag sde) are the third and
highest of the divisions of the teachings of dzogchen. The other two
are the mind class (sems sde) and the space class (klong sde). See
Dudjom Rinpoche, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism, pp.
319—45, and Tulku Thondup Rinpoche, Buddha Mind, pp. 47–81.
55. de 'dras rim brod lam la 'bad na legs, see page 63, grod in the wood-
block should read bgrod.
$6. Channels (rtsa, Skt. nadi) through which the vital winds (rlung, Skt.
prana) and seminal drops (thig le, Skt. bindu) move. Chakras (rosa 'khor)
or "channel wheels” are areas where many channels join together.
57. Milarepa (mi la ras pa) (1040–1123) was a great yogi and poet in the
Kagyu lineage whose trials and travails on the spiritual path and elo-
quent songs of realization make his life story perhaps the most popular
of all stories of Tibetan saints.
58. Quoted in Thondup, Buddha Mind, pp. 113-14, translation by Tulku
Thondup.
59. des na lta ba nam mkha' bas kyang mtho/
las ngyu 'bras bag phye bas kyang zhib /
attributed to Padmasambhava, quoted in rdzogs pa chen po klong chen
saying thig gi sngon gro'i khrid yig kun bzang bla ma'i zhal lung, by
160



Notes
Patrul Rinpoche, f. 112. (Translated as Kün-zang La-may Zhal-lung and
as Words of My Perfect Teacher.)
60. Information on Kongtrul's life has been taken from three sources: his
autobiography, phyogs med ris med kyi bisan pa la 'dun shing dge sbyong gi
gzugs bryan chang ba blo gros mtha' yas kyi sdei byung ba brjod pa nor
bu sna shogs mdog can, (Jewels of Various Colors, currently under transla-
tion by Richard Barron) in vol. 62 of The Treasury of Precious Treasure
(rin chen gter mdzod); E. Gene Smith's “Jam mgon Kong sprul and the
Nonsectarian Movements in Among Tibetan Texts; and Dudjom
Rinpoche's The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism, vol. I, pp. 899-68.
61. Kongtrul had many different names given to him at different occa-
sions. His first ordination name was Karma Ngawang Yönten
Gyamtso Trinle Kunkhyab Palzangpo, his bodhisattva ordination
name was Gyalsay Lodrö Thaye, his initiatory name was Padma
Gargyi Wangchuk Trinlay Drodultsal, and his name as a tertön was
Chime Tsenyi Yungdrung Lingpa. Any of these might be used to sign
his compositions. He never signed Kongtrul, an abbreviation of his
incarnation name, but occasionally “Jamgön Lama." Jamgön indicates
the bodhisattva of transcendent intelligence, Manjusri, of whom
Kongtrul was said to be an emanation. E. Gene Smith's ** Jam mgon
Kong sprul and the Nonsectarian Movement" in Among Tibetan Texts,
PP. 258-62.
62. Jewels of Various Colors, ff. 9 and 12b.
63. Jewels of Various Colors, ff. 17-18.
64. The late Dezhung Rinpoche, a great Sakya lama and proponent of non-
sectarianism, said, “It was common in Tibet for the least spiritually
developed adherents of each of the four great orders to nurture this
spirit of sectarianism. Often monks and lay disciples of one order
would refuse to attend the services of other orders. Monks would refuse
to study or read the literature of others simply because they were writ-
ings of masters who belonged to another lineage—no matter how good
the literature might be." From "Buddhism Without Sectarianism,"
translated by Jared Rhoron, p. 6.
65. The custom of recognizing the new incarnations of past great masters
is widespread in Tibet. They are called sulku, (nirmanakaya, emana-
tion body), referring to bodhisattvas who willingly come back in order
to continue their work for sentient beings. It was a wonderful system
to ensure the continuation of the lineages and education of its leaders.
It was also vulnerable to abuse.
161



Creation
Completion
66. Jewels of Various Colors, f. 19.
67. Situ's name is invoked in the first line of the text translated here.
Kongtrul lists a total of sixty teachers in one supplication prayer: ecu-
menical but loyal.
68. Hidden treasures (terma, gter ma) are teachings by the Indian tantric
master Padmasambhava, who successfully introduced Buddhism in
Tibet in the ninth century. Certain teachings were "hidden" for future
generations in times when they would be appropriate. Then they are
rediscovered by gifted individuals or emanations of Padmasambhava
himself. All of the revealers (tertön, gter ston) were predicted by name
in previous treasures.
69. Dudjom Rinpoche (igdral Yeshe Dorje, 1904–87), The Nyingma
School of Tibetan Buddhism, volume I, p. 862.
70. Currently under translation by the Sonada Translation Committee
established by Kalu Rinpoche. Parts of it have been published by
Snow Lion Publications as Myriad Worlds and Buddhist Ethics.
71. "He only seems to want to bring some order into the chaos of this
*rediscovered literature, to establish some criteria of authenticity for
this genre that had often been reviled and rejected by Tibetan scholars
of a more purist bent." E. Gene Smith, “Jam mgon Kong sprul and
the Nonsectarian Movement" in Among Tibetan Texts, p. 263.
72. padma nyin byed dbang po: the twelfth Tai Sirupa (1774-1853),
Kongtrul's principal teacher and head lama of Palpung Monastery, an
important Kagyu center.
73. mosho skyes rdo rje: Lake-born Vajra, a name for Padmasambhava; see
note 25.
74. Vajra friends (rdo rje mched po or mched grogs), sometimes vajra broth-
ers and sisters, refers to fellow practitioners of Vajrayana, or tantric,
Buddhism. It is an important relationship sanctified by the Vajrayana
commitment to honor one another. Various degrees of relationship are
recognized, from students of the same guru who are initiated together
up to the connection between all practitioners. It is significant that the
author sites his vajra friend(s), whom he basically cannot refuse, as a
pretext for the composition of the text. It would be considered pre-
sumptuous to decide on one's own to compose, and most Tibetan
commentaries explain their inception in this way.
75. We do not have the personal good fortune to meet the Buddha, but we
can actually encounter the teacher or guru, and so he or she is consid-
ered even more important than the Buddha for us personally, and not
162



Notes
essentially different. We call that buddha who we meet, the guru. It is
also said, "before the guru, even the word 'buddha' did not exist."
76. 'khor lo bsgyur ba: literally, "wheel monarch," ruler over a world system
during the time when human life spans are exceedingly long. He gains
his absolute power through the possession of a wheel that subdues
beings without violence, and also has the marks of wheels on the soles
of his feet, as do buddhas.
77. dkon mchog gsum, Skt. triratna: the Three Jewels, the Three Precious
Jewels, or the Three Rare and Sublime Ones are the Buddha (sangs
rgyas), or teacher; the Dharma (chos), or the teachings; and the Sangha
(dge 'dun), or the community of practitioners. These are the three tra-
ditional sources of refuge and objects of faith of all Buddhists.
78. rtsa ba gsum, Skt. trimūla: the Three Roots are the guru (bla ma), root of
blessings; the meditational deity (yi dam, Skt. devata), root of accom-
plishment; and dākas, dākinis (mkha' gro), and Dharma protectors (chos
skyong, Skt. dharmapala), root of enlightened activity. These are the sec-
ond three sources of refuge (along with the Three Jewels), and are partic-
ular to the Vajrayāna Buddhism of Tibet.
79. dkyil "khor, Skt. mandala: see note 22.
80. chos nyid, Skt. dharmata: reality, the essential true nature of all phe-
nomena, which is emptiness.
81. Nāgārjuna (klu sgrub), a great master and scholar from southern India
who lived approximately four hundred years after the Buddha's death.
He is best known for his interpretation of the concept of emptiness,
which led to the formation of the Madhyamaka school of philosophy.
82. shes rab, Skt. prajña: this word carries the full range of connotations of
perceptive and apprehensive abilities, from direct understanding or mas-
tery of a single subject, to full realization of the ultimate nature of reality.
The choice of intelligence," or "transcendent intelligence," rather than
the usual "wisdom" or "knowledge," reflects the active mode of that
which apprehends, rather than that which is apprehended. Here the dis-
cussion is of the three kinds of intelligence that arise from listening, con-
templating, and meditating.
83. Cyclic existence ('khor be, Skt. samsära) and transcendence of its suf-
fering (mya ngan las 'das pa, Skt. nirvana).
84. gnas lugs: literally, the way of abiding. The true nature or natural con-
dition of all phenomena.
85. Imaginary nature (kun brtags, Skt. parikalpita) and perfectly existent
nature (yongs grub, Skt. parinišpanna) are technical terms used in the
163



Creation
Completion
Cittamātra school of philosophy for the idea of the three natures (rang
bzhin gsum, Skt. trisvabhava), the third being the dependent nature
(gzhan-dbang, Skt. paratantra). The two mentioned here seem to
correspond to the relative truth (kun rdzob bden pa) and the absolute
truth (don dam bden pa, see "second turning" section of the introduc-
tion). Here they are in relation to the contrivance (bcos ma) of the cre-
ation stage and the genuine condition (rnal ma), or true nature, in the
completion stage, respectively. In other words, the creation stage deals
with the vast array of phenomena on the relative level, and the com-
pletion stage deals with the essential nature of phenomena on the
absolute level. For a practical discussion of the three natures and the
two truths, see Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso's Progressive Stages of
Meditation on Emptiness.
86. sngags lam, Skt. mantramärga: the approach or path of the Secret
Mantra Vehicle is synonymous with Vajrayāna or tantra. (See the
"tantra" section of the introduction.) It is also known as the path of
method (thabs, Skt. upāya), for its many skillful techniques.
87. drang nges lam: usually, the conventional or provisional meaning
(drang don, Skt. neyartha), which is caught in order to guide common
people in the right direction (gdul bya thun mong ba mams kha dran
bari phyir du), but which needs to be interpreted on a deeper level to
understand the truth; and the definitive or certain meaning (nges don,
Skt. nithärta), which clearly states the absolute truth and needs no fur-
ther qualifications. There has been much discussion and disagreement
among Tibetans on which doctrines are which, but all agree that both
are still valid. Here these two are applied to practice (lam) rather than
doctrine.
88. dul is translated in this section as "control," an unpopular word, but it
seems close to the meaning. Other words might be "subdue," "mas-
ter," or "conquer."
89. nyon mongs pa, Skt. kleſa: see note 8.
90. rten 'brel, short for rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba, Skt. pratiryasamutpada:
see the "first turning" section of the introduction. Because of its pro-
found and complex nature, contemplation on the subject of interde-
pendent relationship is used as a remedy for stupidity.
91. od dpag med Skt. amitabha: Boundless Light, the name of a buddha-
the head of the lotus family—that is associated with the transforma-
tion of desire into the pristine wisdom of discernment (so sor rtog par
ye shes, see note 48).
164



Notes
92. khrag 'thung, Skt. heruka: a general name for wrathful meditational
deities, and also a name for Cakrasamvara ('khor lo bde mchog) or
"Wheel of Sublime Bliss," one of the tantric deities particularly associ-
ated with desire, as the name implies.
93. phyag rgya chen po, Skt. mahamudra: "the Great Seal," the culminating
formless practice in the Kagyu tradition. The term is also synonymous
with its fruition: recognition of ultimate reality.
94. so sor rtogs pa'i ye shes: see note 91 and nore 48.
95. Gyalwa Yangön (rgyal ba yang dgon pa rgyal mtshan dpal; alias lha gdon
pa, 1213-58), a distinguished disciple of the founder of the Upper
Drukpa Kagyu tradition (stod 'brug pa dkar brgyud pa), was born in
che Dingri area of western Tibet. Three volumes of his collected writ-
ings (gsung 'bum) are published by Tango Monastic Community,
Tango, Thimpu, Bhutan.
96. rdo rje 'chang: "Holder of the Vajra," the embodiment of the buddhas
of the five families, and especially in the Kagyu tradition, the symbolic
representation of the body of reality (chos sku, Skt. dharmakäya), the
ultimate state of enlightenment.
97. "lhor lo bde mchog: see note 92.
98. thig l 'chor ba: loss of seminal drops. The word thig le (Skt. bindu) has
a wide range of meanings, such as a tiny point of energy, the vital
energy as embodied in the seminal fluids (as is the case here), medita-
tional visions of spheres, and the totality of being. The general conno-
tations are of vital energy and of an indivisible totality, being the seed
or nucleus of enlightened mind.
99. zung jug, Skt. yuganaddha: “two into (one)." Here it is the two stages
of creation and completion that must ultimately be integrated, just as
form and emptiness, or relative and absolute, must be realized as essen-
cially the same. Thus zung jug can also refer to the ultimate realiza-
tion, or state of enlightenment.
roo.chos kyi dbyings, Skt. dharmadhatu: realm of reality or absolute
expanse-emptiness.
101. bde bar gshegs pa i snying po, Skt. sugatagarbha: see the "third turning*
section of the introduction.
102.chos kyi sku, Skt. dharmakaya: the ultimate and formless dimension
of buddha. See the "deity practice" section of the introduction and
note 40.
103.dbyibs kyi mal byor: refers to the creation-stage practices of visualization.
104. mngon byang Inga, rdo rje bzhi cho ga grum: names for sequences covering
165



Creation on Completion
the visualization process in greater or fewer stages from the initial empti-
ness up to the full form of the deity. See the creation stage section of
the introduction.
105. mngon rrogs: literally means "actual realization," but here refers to the
section in the liturgy of a deity visualization where the various attrib-
utes of the deity are described.
106. bar do: the time and state of being from death until the next rebirth.
107. rnying ma and gar ma: see notes 26 and 28.
108. The three meditative absorptions or samadhis are de bzhin nyid kyi ting
nge 'dzin, kun nas snang bai ting nge 'dzin, and royu bai ting nge 'dzin.
See the creation stage section of the introduction. Kongtrul lists
these three absorptions and then four additional stages of visualization,
making the “five enlightening factors” somewhat difficult to count.
One standard list of the five is enlightenment from the visualization 1)
of emptiness, 2) of the moon (or sun, etc.) seat, 3) of the seed syllable
or letter, 4) of the hand implements, and s) of the fully complete form
of the deity. This correlates with Kongtrul's list as follows: the first two
absorptions represent the first enlightening factor; the third absorption is
the second factor; the next two stages line up with the next two factors;
and the final two stages combine as the final, full visualization. This
scheme is according to Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche.
109. bla med rgyud sde, Skt. Anuttarayogatantra: according to the New (gsar
ma) Schools (see note 28), there is a fourfold classification of the tantras:
kriyayoga, caryāyoga, yogatantra, and anuttarayogatantra—the highest.
This next sequence of five visualizations from highest yogatantra are a
different style of creating the visualization but purifying the same life
and death experiences as the first set of five enlightening factors.
tro. 'od gsah Skt. abhâsvara: not an actual light, it is the inner radiance or
luminosity of mind itself. It is a way of describing the direct experi-
ence of mind's true nature. It also occurs during the death process,
when it provides a good opportunity for enlightenment if it can be
recognized.
III. rgyu yi rdo rje 'dzin pa and bras bu'i rdo rje 'dzin pa: according to my
sources, usually the "cause vajra holder" is made up of the letters or
vibrations that are visualized inside the celestial palace that will transform
into the deity, and the "result vajra holder" is that fully formed deity.
112. rlung, Skt. prāņa or vāyu: the vital energy or motility that moves
through the body and mind on the subtle level.
113. sang mched thob gsum: three stages of experience pertaining to the
166



Notes
process of dissolution of the consciousness into emptiness that happens
with every thought, with sleep, with death, and intentionally with
advanced stages of realization. At death it leads to unconsciousness in an
ordinary person, or, for a trained practitioner, to the state of clear light
(od gsal). The three stages can also describe the opposite process of
consciousness emerging from unconsciousness.
114. snang ba dkar dmar: during the death process and the three stages of
experience mentioned above, the white and red elements in the form
of vital seminal drops (that a living being has received from the par-
ents, and which together, with consciousness, constitute the basis of
life) descend and ascend from their places in the head and navel and
dissolve together. For the dying person, this is experienced as a vision
of white and then of red.
115. ye shes sems dpa, Skt. jñānasattva: the actual presence of the deity that
is invoked and enters the visualized form of the deity, the commitment
being (dam tshig sems dpa, Skt. samayasattva).
116. Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche favors the spelling phrul spyod
over 'khrul spyod in the woodblock text. This refers to the various sports,
crafts, and stunts that a youth would need to master at this stage of life.
117. dbang bskur, Skt. abhiseka: this refers to the section in many deity
practices for conferring the four empowerments on oneself as the
deity. They are the same empowerments that one receives from the
guru prior to beginning deity practice. See the "guru" section of the
introduction and note 42.
118. byang chub sems bskyed, Skt. bodhicitta.
119. theg pa chen po, Skt. mahāyāna.
120. tshogs gnyis: the accumulation of merit (bsod nams) and wisdom (ye shes).
121. mam dag dran pa: recollecting the purity refers to the various pure
characteristics of the deity being manifestations of pure qualities; for
example, the two crossed arms of Vajradhara manifest the insepara-
bility of means and wisdom. See the creation stage" section of the
introduction.
122. gsal snang: luminous appearance. The text should read gal snang chung
ngu yin rather than the woodblock's gsal snang chung ngu yis, according
to Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche.
123. mam par smin pa'i rig 'dzin: "awareness" or "knowledge holders" (rig
dzin, Skt. vidyadhara) are those who attain realization through the
Secret Mantra Vehicle. They are often elevated to the status of the
deities. The maturation knowledge-holder is the first of a classification
167



Creation
Completion
of four in the mahayoga teachings of the Ancient tradition. See
Dudjom, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism, vol. I, p. 260.
124. rdzogs pa chen pa, Skr. mahasandhi or atiyoga: see note 54.
125. dbu ma, Skt. madhyamaka: philosophy and practice of the Middle
Way, beyond extremes of existence or non-existence. It is the term
used to describe the highest teachings and meditational realization in
the Gelug tradition.
126. mam shes tshogs brgyad, Skt. astavijñānakāya: see note si.
127. kun gzhi, Skt. alaya: the pure, underlying basis of everything. This is
not the same as the term "foundation consciousness" (kun gzhi mam
shes, Skt. älayavijñäna), which has the sense of a straying from or over-
laying of this fundamentally pure basis.
128. sems nyid, Skt. cittatva: "mind itself" or "mind-as-such," the essential
nature of mind, not different from enlightened mind.
129. Rangjung Dorje (rang byung rdo rje, 1284-1334), the third in the
Karmapa line of emanations who headed the Karma Kagyu subsect of
the Kagyu lineage. Rangjung Dorje was a great yogi and scholar, a
holder of the Kagyu and Nyingma lineages, and notable for his syn-
thesis of the yogic meditation tradition of those lineages with the
philosophical tradition of the Yogacára school. A discussion of the
eight consciousness groups may be found in his The Treatise that
Differentiates Consciousness and Wisdom (mam shes ye shes 'byed pa'i
bstan bcos).
130. de ma thag yid: "instantaneous mind” refers to the function usually
associated with afflicted mind that causes one mind moment to arise
immediately after another, and provides mental continuity. Sometimes,
it is counted separately from afflicted mind, making a total of nine col-
lections of consciousness. Also see note 5r.
131. The text reads 'du shes (discrimination), a misprint for 'du 'byed (for-
mation) according to Venerable Bokar Tulku Rinpoche. This makes
much more sense, as "discrimination" was just mentioned two lines
above, and follows this discussion of what is basically the five aggre-
gates (phung po Inga, Skt. pañcaskandha), that is: form (gzugs, Skt.
rüpa), feeling (tshor ba, Skt. vedana), discrimination ('du shes, Skt.
samjñā), formation ('du byed, Skt. samskära), and consciousness (mam
shes, Skt. vijñāna). Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche concurs with
this interpretation.
132. bral bar rkyen dang rnam smin rgyur; the condition for fruition of
freedom and the cause of the fruition of perfect maturity. These two
168



Notes
fruitions are discussed at length in the Uttaratantra in the sixth vajra
point on qualities. The condition of freedom (from obscurations) is the
accumulation of wisdom, and the result is the dharmakãya, which ben-
efits oneself. The cause of perfect maturity is the accumulation of merit,
and the result is the rūpakāya, which benefits others. The discussion in
the text seems to be about perfect virtue (zag med dge ba) that cannot be
imprinted on the foundation consciousness, so this is the interpretation
offered by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche. However, there is
another interpretation based on imperfect virtue (zag bcas dge ba)
offered by Bokar Rinpoche: that the virtuous imprint remains as poten-
tial "unless separated by conditions" (bral bai rkyen), such as anger or
regret for those actions, or "used up through fruition" (mam smin
rgrur), that is, by enjoying the karmic result of those virtuous actions.
133. 'bur joms mgo thug: literally "to flatten the swelling (and) meet the
head." In other words, "to strike at first appearance."
134. For the twelve links, Tibetan just uses rten 'brel bou grayis, basically the
same word as in interdependent relationship (rten cing 'brel bar "byung
be, Skt. pratītyasamutpāda), whereas Sanskrit uses the separate term
nidäna (link) for the twelve. They are: ignorance, karmic formation,
consciousness, name and form, six faculties, contact, feeling, craving,
grasping, existence, birth, and aging and death. In Tibetan iconography
and for pedagogical purposes, these are portrayed as the wheel of life.
135. rlung bcu, Skt. dasaväyu: the five basic vital winds of breath, excre-
tion/reproduction, speech, digestion, and metabolism/circulation/mus-
cular movement. The five ancillary vital winds are those connecting
with the eyes, the heart, the nose, the tongue, and the whole body.
Here the winds maturing means that they have at least begun to enter
the central channel.
136. drod, Skt. úsman: technically, one of the four signs of accomplishment
of the path of application (sbyor lam, Skt. prayogamärga), where special
insight into the four noble truths results in the meditative absorption
of realization of absence of external reality. The "warmth" is likened to
the heating up of a flint just before bursting into flame. It may also be
used as a general term for a high level of realization, and does not
imply actual heat.
137. bde gsal mi rtog nyams: the three meditative experiences arising from
the practice of calm abiding (zhi gnas, Skt. samatha).
138. grub brnyes, the same as grub thob, Skt. siddha: yogis with a high degree
of accomplishment in meditation.
169



Creation
Completion
139. mal 'byor chen po, Skt. mahayoga: in the system of classification of the
Ancient tradition (rying ma), there are six tantric vehicles: kriya-
tantra, caryātantra, yogatantra, mahayoga, anuyoga, and atiyoga, each
one “higher than the last, culminating in atiyoga, or dzogchen.
140. This refers to the idea of the inseparability of the two truths, the rela-
tive and the absolute.
141. rtse grig: one-pointedness is the first of the four realization stages or
yogas of mahāmudrā (phyag chen rnal 'byor bzhi); the others are: free
of elaboration (spros bral), single flavor (ro gcig), and no meditation
(sgom med).
142. bying rgod: sinking and scattering are the two most obvious difficulties
to overcome in calm abiding medication (chi gnas, Skt. Samatha).
143. sku yum, Skt. trikāya: the three bodies or dimensions of Buddha (see
the "third turning" section and note 40). Here they are being intro-
duced as the actual true nature of mind, corresponding with its three
aspects of emptiness, clarity, and compassion (or unimpededness),
respectively.
144. khams grum, Skt. Fridhätu: a threefold division of cyclic existence: the
desire realm ('dod khams, Skt. kämadhätu), form realm (gzugs khams,
Skt. rūpadhatu), and formless realm (gzugs med khams, Skt. årüpa.
dhātu). The first includes our world of experience; the other two are
god realms which are the result of various meditative frances.
145. Ihag mthong, Skt. vipasyanā: insight is the practice of looking at the
nature of the mind once it has been pacified in the practice of calm
abiding (zhi gnas, Skt. Samatha). The two practices are the recom-
mended preliminary to the practice of mahamudra in the "normal"
Kagyu approach.
146. man ngag sde: see note 54.
147. rig pai lam: "Rigpa" is an important term in the dzogchen teachings,
referring to the intrinsic, primordially pure awareness, completely
beyond and before the functions of mind. Its recognition involves a
different approach.
148. sgro skur, short for sgro 'dogs (exaggeration or projection) and skur 'debs
(denial, underestimation, denigration): traditionally defined as project-
ing existence on what does not exist (med pa la yod pa) and denying
the existence of what does exist (yod pa la med pa).
149. Pacification (zhi byed) [of suffering) is a practice tradition founded in
the twelfth century by Padampa Sangye (pha dam pa sangs rgyas), and
severance (ccod) is a practice of cutting through attachments initiated.
170



Notes
in Tiber by his student Machik Lapdrön (ma gcig lab sgron). Together
pacification and severance form one of the eight main practice tradi-
tions (shing rta brgach, see note 29) of Tibetan Buddhism.
150. snying thig: a cycle of teachings in the class of esoteric instructions
(man ngag sde) of dzogchen.
151. According to Khenpo Tsultrim, this refers to the three examples by
Vimalamitra that follow.
152. A great Indian master who, along with Padmasambhava and Vairo-
cana, brought dzogchen teachings to Tibet.
153. This is a play with the term "gom" (bsgom), meditation, and the word
from which it derives, "gom" (goms), becoming habituated or getting
used to something
154.Atiyoga, the highest vehicle in the Ancient tradition, equivalent to
dzogchen. See note 139.
ISS. (chos skyong) srung ma, Skt. dharmapāla: a class of wrathful deities that
are oath-bound to protect the doctrine, particularly the secret mantra,
or Vajrayāna, from external and internal dangers and corruptions,
assuring its integrity.
156. bka' brgyud: Coral instruction lineage," one of the four main schools of
Tibetan Buddhism that established a large monastic network. See the
"Buddhism in Tibet" section of the introduction.
157. rtsa dbu ma, Skt. avadhūti: the main channel or energy pathway (rtsa,
Skt. nädi) of the psychophysical body through which the vital winds
(rlung, Skt. prāna) and seminal drops (thig le, Skt. bindu) move. It is
visualized as being approximately along the inner side of the backbone.
It is a goal of yogic practice to bring the vital winds into the central
channel, causing the realization of true nature. Conversely, by recog-
nizing the intrinsic nature of mind, the vital winds will enter sponta-
neously into the central channel.
158. rlung ro bsal: a practice of clearing out the "dregs" of the old vital wind
by a specific yogic breathing exercise.
159. rdo rje sems dpa, Skt. vajrasattva: "Indestructible Being," a sambhoga-
käya buddha, the lord of all the deity mandalas, particularly associated
with purity. Here the reference is to any deity, appearing and yet empty.
160. dam shig, Skt. samaya: the "sacred word" or covenant in Vajrayana
between the disciple and the guru, and also the commitment to the
practices received from the guru. There are different sets of specific
commitments from different tantras. These are the "four great special
commitments" (khyad par chen por dam tshig bzhi) associated with



Creation
Completion
atiyoga: non-existence (med pa), evenness (phyal ba), singularity (gcig
pu), and spontaneous presence (Thun grub), although here it is thun
rdzogs). Kongtrul addresses them further in his Treasury of Knowledge
(shes bya mdzod), vol. II, p. 194.
161. lam khyer: literally, carrying (the practice) on the path or as the path.
162. Here and elsewhere, the Sanskrit syllables or "letters" refer to the visual-
ization of the letters themselves and sometimes also the utterance of their
sound while visualizing some action or effect that is taking place due to
their inherent powers. The mantra OM AH HUNG specifically embodies
the power of enlightened body, speech, and mind, respectively.
163. dkon mchog rjes dran pa'i mdo. For sürra, see note 17.
164. rigs brgya'i tha: according to zab chos zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol las
chos spyod bag chags rang groh a treasure text discovered by Karma
Lingpa, there are 42 peaceful deities in the heart, 10 knowledge-
holders (rig 'dzin, Skt. vidyadhara, note 123) at the throat, and 60 (or
58) wrachful deities in the brain. Generally, the 42 peaceful and 58
wrathful deities are known as the Hundred Deities of the Holy
Family. (I am indebted to Tulku Thondup Rinpoche for this note.)
165. mkha' 'gro ma, Skt. dakinis: female "sky-goers" who embody the femi-
nine principles of emptiness and wisdom.
166.tshogs kyi 'khorlo, Skt. ganacakra: the tantric practice of a sacred feast
where the special consecrated substances are enjoyed without attach-
ment. Participants maintain the knowledge that the place, the food,
and they themselves are all divine and perfectly pure.
167. bla ma'i mal byor, Skt. guru yoga: an essential devotional tantric prac-
tice in which the guru is perceived as the essence of the buddhas, as
the meditational deity, and as the nature of one's own mind.
168. byang chub sems dpa': "hero of awakening," bodhisattva activities fall
under the classifications of the six perfections (pha rol tu phyin pa, Skt.
päramitā): generosity, moral discipline, patience, perseverance, medita-
tion, and transcendent intelligence.
169. bka'rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhis the four seals that indicate the Buddha's
teaching are more usually stated as: all that is composite is imperma-
nent, all that is corrupt is suffering, all phenomena are without self,
and transcendence (nirväņa) is peace. Here, emptiness (replacing
nonself) and peace are put together as qualities of nirvana.
170. Torma (gtor ma, Skt. bali) are sculptures with specific shapes and col-
ors made from flour and decorated with butter that are made for offer-
ings during ceremonies or for representing the deities.
172



Notes
171. dzam bha la, Skt. jambhala: a wealth deiry, who may also be propitiat-
ed in various manifestations for healing.
172. Trokma (phrog ma), the plunderer, was a female spirit of the "harm-
doer" class (gnod sbyin, Skt. yakía). According to legend, she had soo
hungry children to whom she had to feed 1500 beings every day. One
day the Buddha Sakyamuni hid one of her children and struck a bar-
gain for its return; if she would promise never to kill again, his followers
would offer her (and her type) a specially consecrated bit of food from
their meals every day from then on. To this day, monks and nuns and
lay practitioners take a bit of food (chang bu) from their meal and pinch
it in their hand, forming a shape with five ridges, representing
Trokma's five hundred children.
173. Jurgek (jur gegs) and Kabarma (kha 'bar ma) are names for certain
types of hungry spirits (yi dvags, Skt. preta), a class of beings who are
continually beset by sufferings of extreme hunger and thirst, the
karmic fruition of former greed. The custom of offering them specially
consecrated water also began with stories from the time of Buddha
Säkyamuni. Disciples of the Buddha doing their begging rounds saw
the hideous form of Constricted Throat (jur gegs), a spirit unable to
pass anything through its tiny throat. The Buddha explained that it
had been a stingy (constricted) person in the past life, giving only
water to others. Now it could only partake of absolutely pure water, so
disciples of the Buddha are instructed to scrub their hands thoroughly
and offer pure water by means of special mantras, which is the only
way the suffering of these spirits can be somewhat relieved. The
Buddha's nephew Anandā encountered Blazing Mouth (kha 'bar ma),
a female hungry spirit with fire blazing out of her mouth, who told
him that he would die in seven days and be born as a hungry spirit
himself. The Buddha then consoled Ananda with the prescription to
redeem this karma through offering pure consecrated water to the
hungry spirits using special mantras. (These stories have been taken
from gtor mai de nyid bdud stii dga'ston (A Festival of the Ambrosial
Essence of Torma by the Fifth Shamarpa, Könchok Yenlak, 1525–83.)
174. khams: the territory of eastern Tibet. Generally, the native people
called the east "Kham" and the west and central parts “Bö* (bod),
reflecting the ancient cultural differences. The term Bö has been trans-
lated as "Tibet," a foreign term, and come to denote both areas, which
were seen as a national unit from the time of the Fifth Dalai Lama
(1617–82) until the Chinese invasion of 1959.
173



Creation
Completion
175. o rgyan, Skt. oddiyana: a place in the western part of ancient India
(perhaps present-day Pakistan) where Padmasambhava manifested in a
lotus. Here, it is used as a name for Padmasambhava himself.
176. thugs rje chen po, Skt. kärunika: also called "Chenrezig" (spyan ras gzigs,
Skt. Avalokitesvara), a deified bodhisattva, the very embodiment of
awakened compassion, who is held dearly by the Tibetan people as the
special protector and patron of Tiber.
177. OM MA NI PAD ME HUNG: the mantra of Chenrezig, the Great Compas-
sionate One.
178. bar gyi rlung: there are many forms of breathing exercises involved in
completion-stage yogas; holding the intermediate vital wind involves
"joining the lower and upper winds in the middle.
179. ka ti: a channel going from the heart to the eyes. These three essential
instructions" are mentioned basically in passing, and refer the practi-
tioner to a whole set of detailed esoteric instructions that would be out
of place here.
180. dka'ba med par, incorrectly spelled as bka'ba med par.
181. mnyam med dvags po, or drags po lha rje: "the physician of Dagpo," a
name for Gampopa (sgam po pa, 1079_1153, see note 41). The advice
from Gampopa that is cited here seems to be a supercondensed
method for doing these practices during daily activities: completion
stage (holding a few gentle breaths), creation stage (mental or silent
recitation), and their inseparability in the blending of one's mind with
the guru's enlightened mind.
182. This refers to the yoga of clear light (od gsal mal 'byor), in which one
attempts to recognize the nature of the clear light during deep sleep.
183. Stages in the practice of dream yoga (rmi lam mal byor), to recognize
and gain control of dreams in order to apply that ability to phenome-
nal existence.
184. A reference to the yoga of the intermediate stage (bar do mal 'byor),
where one prepares for the recognition of the clear light during the
intermediate experience of death. These yogas are all completion-stage
practices, as found, for instance, in the six yogas of Naropa (na ro chos
drug), first presented in English in W. Y. Evans-Wentz's Tibetan Yoga
and Secret Doctrines.
185. spyod lam mam bzhi: standing, walking, sitting, and lying down.
186. bslab pa gsum. Skt. fifiksä: ethical discipline (tshul khrims, Skt. Sila),
meditative absorption (ting nge 'dzin, Skt. samadhi), and transcendent
intelligence (shes rab, Skt. prajñā).
174



Notes
187. The first Karmapa, Dusum Khyenpa (dus gsum mkhyen pa, mo-93),
was a disciple of Gampopa (note 41), and founded the subsect of the
Kagyu school called Karma Kagyu. The second Karmapa, Karma
Pakshi (karma pak shi, 1204-83), was the first recognized incarnate
lama or "tulku" (sprul sku), a tradition that rapidly flourished in Tibet.
The Karmapas have continued to appear until the present time, which
is the time of the seventeenth. Although Kongtrul is of course praying
for the benefit of the entire lineage here, the specific Karmapa whom
he may be addressing at this time (1840) would be the fourteenth,
Thekchok Dorje (theg mchog rdo rje, 1797–1867).
188. karma ngag dbang yon tan rgya mtsho: one of the many names of
Jamgön Kongtrul (see note 61). The style of this colophon and condu-
sion of the text, where the author states his inspiration and his own
lack of worth, is quite traditional and stylized, and not particularly to
be believed, although there is no reason to think that Jamgön Kongtrul
was not truly humble.
175



Bibliography
Works in English
Ancient Tibet. Emeryville CA: Dharma Publications, 1986.
Conze, Edward. Buddhist Thought in India. Ann Arbor: The University of
Michigan Press, 1967.
Conze, Edward. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines and la
Verse Summary. San Francisco: Four Seasons Foundation, 1973.
The Dalai Lama XIV, Tenzin Gyatso. Dzogchen: The Heart Essence of the Great
Perfection, Translated by Geshe Thupten Jinpa and Richard Barron,
edited by Patrick Gafney, Ithaca NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2000.
The Dalai Lama XIV, Tenzin Gyatso. The World of Tibetan Buddhism.
Translated and edited by Geshe Thupten Jinpa. Boston: Wisdom
Publications, 1995.
Dezhung Rinpoche. "Buddhism Without Sectarianism." Translated by
Jared Rhoton. 1983, unpublished.
Gyaltrul Rinpoche. Gencrating the Deity. Translated by Sang ye Khandro.
Ithaca NY: Snow Lion Publications, 1996.
Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche. Pure Appearance: Development and Completion
Stages in Vajrayana Practice. Translated by Ani Jinba Palmo. Halifax,
Nova Scotia: Vajravairochana Translation Committee, 1992.
Dudjom Rinpoche, Jikdrel Yeshe Dorje. The Nyingma School of Tibetan
Buddhism. Translated by Gyurme Dorje and Matthew Kapstein.
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1991.
Evans-Wentz, W. Y. Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines. London: Oxford
University Press, 1958.
177



Creation & Completion
Gampopa. The Jewel Omament of Liberation. Translated by Herbert V.
Guenther. Boston and London: Shambhala, 1971.
Hookham, S. K. The Buddha Within. Albany NY: The State University of
New York Press, 1991.
Jamgön Kongtrul. The Great Path of Awakening: A Commentary on the
Mahayana Teaching of the Seven Points of Mind Training. Translated
by Ken McLeod. Boston and London: Shambhala, 1987.
Jamgön Kongtrul. The Torch of Certainty. Translated by Judith Hanson.
Boston and London: Shambhala, 1986,
Khenpo Tsuitrim Gyamtso. Creation and Completion. Translated by Sarah
Harding. Halifax: Vajravairochana Translation Committee, 1998.
Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso. Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness.
Translated by Shenpen Hookham. Oxford, England: Longchen
Foundation, 1986.
Maitreya/Asanga. The Changeless Nature. Translated by Ken and Katia
Holms. Scotland: Karma Drubgyud Darjay Ling, 1985.
Padmasambhava. Natural Liberation: Padmasambhava's Teachings on the
Six Bardos. Commentary by Gyatrul Rinpoche, Translated by B. Alan
Wallace. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1998.
Patrul Rinpoche. Kün-zang La-may Zhal-lung: The Oral Instruction of
Künzag La-ma on the Preliminary Practices of Dzog-chen Long-ch'en
Nying-tig. Translated by Sonam T. Kazi. Upper Montclair NJ:
Diamond-Lotus Publishing, 1989.
Patrul Rinpoche. The Words of My Perfect Teacher. Padmakara Translation
Group. San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1994.
Pettit, John Whitney, Mipham's Beacon of Certainty, Illuminating the View
of Dzogchen, the Great Perfection. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1999.
Shabkar Tsogdruk Rangdrol. The Life of Shabkar. Translated by Matthieu
Ricard. Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion Publications, 2001.
Smith, E. Gene. Among Tibetan Texts: History and Literature of the
Himalayan Plateau. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2001.
Stein, R. A. Tibetan Civilization. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1972.
178



Bibliography
Thrangu Rinpoche. Transcending Ego: Differentiating Consciousness from
Wisdom: A Treatise of the Third Karmapa. Translated by Peter Roberts.
Boulder CO: Namo Buddha Publications, 2001.
Thrangu Rinpoche. Everyday Consciousness and Buddha Awakening,
Translated and edited by Susanne Schefczyk. Ithaca: Snow Lion, 2002.
Tai Situ Rinpoche. The Third Karmapa's Mahamudra Prayer. Translated and
edited by Rosemarie Fuchs. Ithaca NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2002.
Tulku Thondup Rinpoche. Buddha Mind: An Anthology of Lonechen
Rabjam's Writings on Dzogpa Chenpo. Ithaca NY: Snow Lion
Publications, 1989.
Tulku Thondup Rinpoche. Hidden Teachings of Tibet: An Explanation of
the Terma Tradition of the Nyingma School of Buddhism. Boston:
Wisdom Publications, 1986, 1997.
Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche. As It Is, Vol. I and II. Kathmandu: Rangjung
Yeshe Publications, 1999.
Zangpo, Ngawang, Sacred Ground: Jamgon Kongtrul on "Pilgrimage and
Sacred Geography " Ithaca NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2001.
Works in Tibetan
bod kyi eshig mdzod chen mo. (The Great Tibetan Dictionary.) 3 vols.
Beijing: mi rigs dpe skrun khang (Minorities Press), 1982.
Gampopa. rie sgam po pai zhal gdams/ lam mchog rin po chei phreng ba.
(Precious Garland of the Sublime Path.) Rumtek, Sikkim: Karmapa'i
chos sgar, n.d.
Gampopa. mnyam med rje busun sgam po par phyag rgya chen po lam gcig
chod. (The Single Decisive Path, the Mahamudrä of the Unequalled and
Revered Gampopa.)
Gampopa. dam chos yid bzhin nor bu thar pa rin po che i gyan. (See above,
The Jewel Ornament of Liberation. Also Gems of Dharma, Jewels of
Freedom. Translated by Ken and Katia Holms, forthcoming from
Snow Lion Publications.) Rumtek, Sikkim: Karmapa'i chos sgar, a.d.
179



Creation
Completion
Gampopa, Mamgala. gsang sngags rdo rie theg pa'i spyi don mdor bsdus pa
legs bshad nor bui od zer. (Jewel Radiance.) Delhi: Delhi Karmapa
Chodhey Gyalwa Sungrab Partun Khang, n.d.
Jamgön Kongtrul. phyogs med ris med kyi bstan pa la dun shing dge sbyong
si gzugs bryan chang ba blo gros mtha' yas kyi sde'i byung ba brjod pa
nor bu sna tshogs mdog can. In volume 62 of The Treasury of Precious
Treasure (rin chen gter mdzod). Autobiography of Jamgön Kongtrul
(Jewel of Various Colors).
Jamgön Kongtrul (compiled by). shangs lugs bde mchog Iha Inga i sgrub thabs
kyi mam par bshad pa zab don psal byed. Taranatha, from gdams ngag
mdzod shangs chos (The Shangpa Teachings in the Treasury of Instructions).
Jamgön Kongtrul, shes bya kun khyab mdzod. (theg pa'i sgo kun las brus pa
gsung rab rin po che'i mdzod bslab pa gsum legs par ston pai bstan bcos
shes bya kun khyab.) (Treasury of Knowledge.) 3 vols. Beijing: Mi rigs
dpe skrun khang (Minorities Press), 1982.
Kalu Rinpoche. ka lu rin po che'r kun gzhi sogs khrid. (Kalu Rinpoche's
Comments on Foundation Consciousness, etc.) Unpublished.
Karmapa III, Rangjung Dorje. mam shes ye shes 'byed pa' bstan bcos and
mam par shes pa dang ye shes 'byed par bstan bcos kyi shig don go gal du
'grel pa rang byung dgongs pa'i rgyan. (See above, The Treatise on
Differentiating Consciousness from Wisdom.) Rumtek Sikkim: Dharma
Chakra Centre, n.d.
Karmapa III, Rangjung Dorje. -zab mo nang gi don zhes bya ba'i gzhung
and mal 'byor bla med pa'i rgyud sde rgya mtsho'i snying po bsdus pa zab
mo nang gi don nyung nguli tshig gis mam par grol ba zab don snang
byed. (The Profound Inner Meaning) Rumtek, Sikkim: Karmapa'i
chos sgar, n.d.
Maitreya/Asanga. theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma' bstan bcos. (See above, The
Changeless Nature.) (Skt. mahāyānottaratantrasästra). Rumtek, Sikkim:
Karmapa'i chos sgar, n.d.
Patrul Rinpoche. kun bzang bla mai zhal lung. (See above, The Words of
My Perfect Teacher.) Rumtek, Sikkim, c. 1968.
Shamarpa V, Könchok Yenlak. gtor ma'i de nyid bdud rtsii dga' ston. (A
Festival of the Ambrosial Essence of Torma.)
180



Index
klesha of, 88, 94
mindfulness, liberating through, 55,
139-40
to ordinary reality, undermined by cre-
ation-stage practice, 17, 41, 49
origin of, 3, 9,99
reversing, 33, 94
unpleasantness, removing through medita-
tion On, 94
avadhuti, 19
Avalokiteshvara, 119, 174. See also Chenrczig
zversion. Se ako cmotions, afflictive
exhaustion of, s9
importance of reversing, 33
klesha of, 94
liberating through mindfulness, s,
139-40
origin of, 3. 9, 95, 102
awareness, path of, 63, 138, 141
abiding, calm, 63, 65, 69, 152, 163, 169, 170.
See also shamata
absorption, meditative
all-appearing, 14, 43, 108
of cause, 14. 43, 108, 159
dharmakaya, correspondence with, 108
cnlightening factors, place in, 166
nirmanakaya, correspondence with, 108
sambhogakaya, correspondence with, 108
of suchness, 14, 43, 108
as taming the mind, 87
accomplishment, signs of, 16, 59, 169
action/nonaction, 33
Akshobhya, 96. 176
alaya vijnana, 126. See also consciousness
Amitabha, 37, 96, 116, 164
Amoghasiddhi, 96, 116
analytic mediation, 121, 150
Ancient School. See Nyingma School
anger
and deity visualization, 96, 116
empriness of, 96
grudges weTSUS, 103-4
habit, arising from, 133
ignorance, role in, 95, 104
karma arising from, 140
meditation, examining in, 96, 149–50
thought, angry, 71, 133, 140
arhats, 3
Asanga, 158
atiyoga. See dzogchen
attachment
to abiding, 63
appearance arising from, 73
to creation-stage rcality, undermined by
completion practice, 17, 41
ignorance at root of, 95
impermanence, removing through medicam
tion on, 94
bar do, 14, 166. See also intermediate state
between death and rebirth
bewilderment, 88, 94-95, 102, 116
birth
creation-stage practice correspondences,
14-15, 107, 108-9, 116, 159
purification of, 43, 45, 104-6, 109, 117
types of, 14. 43. 106-7
birthright inheritance, purification of, 45, 110
bka "brgyud angags mdzod (Jamgön Kongtrul),
24
Blazing Mouth spirits, 75, 173
blessing
of Dharma, 151
of empowerment, 151
of guru, 113-14, 117
of yidam, 114, 115
bodhichitta, 111, 167
181



Creation & Completion
Abbor Bodhisattva. Se Shantarakshita
bodhisattvas, 4. 75, 156, 161, 172
bodies of the enlightened principle, 10-II, 15,
41, 47, 61, 103, 158, 170
the body, 88, 91
body of perfect rapturc, un
body of reality, 10–11, 15, 41, 47, 104, 158, 165.
See alo dharmakaya
breath, working with, 71, 77, 148, 152-53, 171,
174
buddha nature
deity visualization practice, recognizing
through, 7, 8-9, 10, 111-12
enlightenment, as inherent potential for,
4-5
ground, path, and fruition breakdown, 8,
guru as link to, 12
kleshas, obscured by, 99
meditation as assimilation of, 33
25 mind's true nature, 99, 128
mirror analogy, 53, 129
neurosis, manifest in, 10
non-action, relation to, 33
purification, basis of in, 8, 10, 41, 43, 99,
ITT
purification, fruition of in, 10, 111
resting in, 135
Buddha Shakyamuni, 2, 5, 11, 84-85, 155, 156,
173
Buddhism
four noble truths, 2
Hinayana, 3
Mahayana, 4-5, 111
origin, 2
psychology, Buddhist, 17
Vajrayana, 5, 6-7, 107-8, 143
of mind, 61, 175, 120–21, 128, 145
of phenomenal appearance, 99
clear light, 8. 45, 67, 77. 167, 174
cloning, 119
cognition, 41. 90, 121-12, 123, 129, 146. See
ako intellect
compassion
consciousness, relation to, 132
deiry, arising through identification with,
16, 15
described, 4
emptiness, relation to, 4.8
lifesryle, integration in, zo
meditation on, 7, 108
negative states, transforming through
meditation based on, 7
practice, as only approach to, 31
completion-stage practice, 16-20
attachment to creation stage reality under-
mined by, 17, 41
creation-stage practice, unity with, 41, 83.
IZI, 165
as definitive meaning, 49
deity visualization practice, place in, 1, 90
energies of the psycho-physical body,
working with, 18-19
cxperiences arising during, 17
as genuine condition, 33, 164-65
guru's rolc, 12-13
intrinsic awareness, resting in, 18
life cycle correspondences, 17
mantra, 7. 37
mental process, 17
as middle practice, 94
mindfulness in, 17-18
purification in, 61
reality, perception of in, 33
stability of mind in, 141-42
vipashyana aspect of, 12, 142
visualization, dissolution of, 18
yogas associated with, 18, 174
confusion, 98-99, 130, 134--18
consciousness. See also mind
of the five gates, 124–25
six groups of, 3, 55, 57, 125-26, 130-31
eight groups of. 17. 51, 53, 57, 123, 124-27.
132, 160, 168
nine groups of, si, 126
afflicted, 126
all-basis, 123, 126, 127, 129
appropriating, 51
Causal Vehicle, 157
chakras, 18, 160
Chakrasamvara, 39, 116, ISI, 158, 165
Chenrezig, 112, 117, 174. See also
Avalokiteshvara
chod practice, 157. See ako severence
Chokgyur Dechen Lingpa, 20
Chokling Rinpoche, 22
Cirtamatra school, 164
clarity
clarity-cmptiness, 49, 150
of dcity's form, 15, 47, 100-101
182



Index
as creation stage, 89–90, 98-100
guru's role, 12
life cycle correspondences, iro, 119
mantra, 7. 37, 110-11
as middle practice, 94
mindfulness in, 69
Nyingma practices, 107-110
pride of the deity aspect, 16, 47, rot
provisional nature of, 49.90
purification in, 13-14, 15-16, 41, 43, 61, 170
recollection of purity aspect, 15-16, 101
Sarma tradition, 108
shamata compared, 119, 120-21
stability, 101, 115-16, 120
cultural considerations, 115
cyclic existence, 2, 9, 31, 163, 170. See also
Samsara
awareness, path of, 63, 138, 141
awareness weisus mind, 67, 145-46
awareness-emptiness, 67, 69
cognition, as type of, 123
compassion, relation to, 132
concept, without, 57
dcity visualization, consciousnesses used
in, 100
of deluded mind, 51, 53, 57, 123, 127-29
dregs of awareness, 137
dzogchen, recognition of awareness in, 170
ejection of, 18
of embryos, frozen, 120
cmptiness of, 53, 67
foundation consciousness, 51, 53, 55, 57.
268
inconstant, 126
in intermediate state between death and
rebirth, 134
inward-directed, 59, 126
meditation and, 127-30
mental consciousness, sz, too, 125
object, awareness without, 146
receptive, 127
sense objects, contact with, s1, 53, 57, 59,
124-25, 130-31, 132–33
shamata, involved in, 127
space, mixing awareness with, 69, 147
Constricted Throat spirit, 75, 173
contemplation
on love, 37
meditation, giving rise to, 31
on repulsiveness, 37
conviction, 33, 49
creation-stage practice, 13-16, 98–100. See also
deity visualization practice
attachment to ordinary reality under-
mined by, 17, 41, 49
atrachment to reality created by, under-
mined by completion practicc, 17,
Dagpo, 77. Scc alo Gampopa
dakinis, 109, 163, 172
Dalai Lama, 151
dam shig, 12, 171-72
dbu ma, 19
de bzhin nyid, 14. See also absorption, medita-
tive
death
clear light experience, 45, 167
completion-stage practice correspon-
dences, 17
creation-stage practice correspondences, 14
Dharma sole help at, 29
process of, 45, 110, 134, 167
purification of death experience, 43, 45,
to, 117
deity visualization practice, 7-11. Ser also cre+
ation-stage practice; specific deities
afflictive states, working with through,
9-10, 37, 39, 95-96, 97-
anger, overcoming through, 96, 116
blessing of deity, 114
bodies of the cnlightened principle, 10-11,
15, 41, 47, 103, 158
body of deity, considering your body to
bc 75, 90-91
body parts of dcity, focusing on, 47
buddha nature, recognition through, 7,
8-9, 10, 11-12
choice of deity, 116-17
darity of form, 15, 47, 100
compassion arising through, 16, IS
clarity of form aspect, 15, 47, 100-00
clarity of mind, expanding through, 125,
120-21
completion-stage practice, unity with, 41,
83, 121, 165
conception/birth correspondences, 14.15,
107, 108-9, 116, 159
45 contrivance, 33, 49, 90, 164
dcity visualization practice, place in, I,
90-91, 11-12
183



Creation
Completion
completion-stage practice, as relates to, 1,
90
conception/birth correspondences, 14-15,
107, 108-9
confidence in identification with deity. 16
consciousnesses used in, too
creation-stage practice, as relates to, 1,
90-95, {II-IZ
cultural considerations, its
dissolution procedurc, 107
empowerment prerequisite to, 13, 159
cmptiness of deity's form, meditating on,
relationships cultivated with dcity, 14
ritual context, 14, 43
Sarma tradition, t07-10
seed syllablc of dcity, 24, 45, 108, 109, 159
self-generation, 98
sequences of visualization, 14--15, 159,
165-66
sphere of light, generating dcity from, ros,
106, 109-10
stability in identification with deity, 101,
its
enlightenment, continuing after, 550
cnlightenment, deity as representation of,
10
front generation, 98, 112, 115
fruition of, 59
Hindu versus Buddhist approach, 112-13
image of dcity, using as aid to concentra-
tion, 47
implements associated with deity, focus.
ing on, 14-15, 47, 100-101, 109
insignia associated with deity, focusing
on, 14--15
instant of recollection, 107, 112, 117
inviting dcity into yourself. 99-100
klesha transformation through, 96, 97-98,
116
knowledge-holder dcitics, 49, 75, 167-68,
172
life cycle correspondence, 14–15, 17, 107,
T!O, 119
liturgical context, 14, 15, 112, 119, 166
luminous appearance, 49, 167
mandala abode of deity, considering place
you find yourself to be, 99
meanings associated with deity, recollect-
ing, 15-16, 101
multiple deitics, working with, 117-18
mundanc thought, pursuing during, 39,
47, 101
nature of the deities, 111--5
Nyingma tradition, 107-10
OM AH HUNG, projecting into deity's
body, 109
peaceful deítics, 75, 157, 172
personal inadequacy set aside by, 16
praises to yourself as the deity, TIO
pride of the deity, 16, 47, tot
pride, overcoming through, 116
tantra, place in, 5, 9, 90-91
thought, pacifying, for
twice-generated dcities, 104-5, 109
vajra holders, 45, 105, 106, 109-10, 165,
166
visibility of deity to others, 16
wrathful deities, 75, 165, 171, 172
delusion
consciousness of deluded mind, 51, 53, 57
123, 127-29
cxhaustion of, 78
foundation consciousness, 51, 53, 55, 57,
168
mirror analogy, 53, 129
purification of, 41, 43
root of, 33
samsara as dcluded projections, 90, 99, 118
transcending, so
desire. See also emotions, afflictive
deity visualization, transforming through,
39, 96, 116
cxamining without fabrication, 71
cxhaustion of, 59
gathering desire of all beings into one's
own desire, 39
prayer to guru, working with through, 39,
rejection of, 19
repulsiveness, renouncing through con-
templation on, 37
sexual yoga, arising in, 39
devas, 118-19
devotion
to Dharma, 92
cmpowerment, increasing through, 151
enthusiasm aspect of, 91
in guru relationship, 12, 3, 77, 92, 114
importance of, 35, 73
lifestylc, integration in, zo
mahamudra, in arising of, 13
184



Index
mind awareness distinctions, 67, 145-46
shamata in, 138, 141
tantric vehicles, as culmination of, 170
mind's true nature, recognizing through,
22
path, place in, 91-92
pure vision, arising from, 92
realization, role in, 16–17. 92
respect aspect of, 91
superior beings, mark of, 31
supplication, generating through, 117
Dezhung Rinpoche, 161
Dharma
blessing of, 151
certainty in, 84-87
commentaries on, 85-86
confidence in. 92
devotion to, 9z
enthusiasm in, 91
follower of, 86
hcaring, knowledge of through, 84, 86, 87
instruction in, 84-85
klesha abandonment as aim of. 88
protectors, 67, 114, 118, 119, 163, 171
respect for, 91
skillful means in presenting, 2
taming the mind, place in, 87–88.94
Wheel of, 7-5, 7, 155
Dharmacakrapravartana Sutra, 155
dharmadhatu, 158, 165
dharmakaya, 11, 108, 158, 165, 169. See also
body of reality
dharmapalas, 114, 118, 119, 163, 171
dharmata, 122, 126, 134, 147, 163
discussing the teachings, using discretion
when, 67, 146
distancing. 96
Distinguishing Between Consciousness and
Wisdom (Rangjung Dorje), 124
distraction, state of no, 63, 71, 142
doha, 86
doubt, 33.89
drcam yoga, 18, 77–78, 79, 131, 174
dreaming. lucidity of mind during, 129-30
duality, 53, 71, 73, 77. 130
Dudjom Rinpoche, 23, 159, 162
dus gsum mkhyen pa, 175
Dusum Khyenpa, First Karmapa, 175
dzogchen, 160
awareness, role in, 18. 141, 170
classes of instruction, 63, 144, 160, 171
common/uncommon, 63, 65, 138, 144
four commitments, 73, 171-72
heart-drop tcachings, 65, 144
CHOR
continuity of application, 31
dropping of, 59, 67, 145
fatigue, accepting, 140-41
relaxing/tightening, 120, 136, 137, 138, 148
cmanation body, II, 158, 161
cmotions, afflictive. See abo kleshas, specific
emotions
conception/birth correlation, is
deity visualization, working with through,
9-10, 37, 39, 95-96. 97–
examining without fabrication, 71
mental control and, 37
mindfulness, working with through, 73
pitfall of, 73
pristine wisdom, as aspects of, 159-60
purification of afflictive obscuration, 41.90
recognition, working with through, 7. 37.
96-97.98
rejection, working with through, 7, 37. 39.
94
transformation of, 7, 9-10, 37, 39, 95-96, 97
empowerment, 13.45, 114-15. 750, 151, 159,
167
cmptiness
of anger, 96
awareness-cmptiness, 67,69
bliss, inseparabic from, 37
calm abiding, danger of mistaking for, 69,
152
clarity-emptiness, 49, 150
compassion, relation to, 4.8
of consciousness/awareness, 53, 67
of deity's form, meditating on, 47
experience of, 8. 37, 69, 121, 147-48
frame of reference, without, 71
of kleshas, 96
logic, imputing via, 8, 121, 122
medication on, 7, 108
middle path, place in, 4
of mind, 8. 47, 122, 129
nature of, 3-4
ncutralíty, danger of mistaking for, 69, 552
self, misconstrued as, 8-9, 53, 129, 130
thought radiance of, 17
understanding of, appropriate, si
185



Creation de Completion
The Encompaument of All Knowledge (Jamgön
Kongtrul), 24
energies of the psycho-physical body, work-
ing with, 18-20
chakras, 18, 160
channels, 19, 69, 77, 152, 160, 171, 174
completion-stage practice, place in, 18-19
path of liberation approach, 19
path of method approach, 19
seminal drops, 18, 160, 165, 173
tantra, place in, s
enlightenment
buddha nature as inherent potential for,
deities as representations of, 10
dcity visualization practice, continuing
after, 150
factors of, 43, 45, 159. 166
form manifestation of, 10-11
intention of. 45
of Shakyamuni Buddha, 2
enthusiasın, 91
cxistcncc, cyclic, 2, 9, 31, 163, 170
The Extraordinary Treasury (amgön
Kongtrul), 28
G
Gampopa, 143, 158, 159, 174, 175
Gautama Buddha. See Buddha Shakyamuni
gdas ngag mazed (Jangôn Kongtul), 1
Gelug school, 6, 157
generosity, 91-92, 111
glang dar ma. See Langdarma, King of Tibet
Great Compassionate Onc, 75. See also
Chenrezig; Avalokiteshvara
great perfection. See dzogchen
great scal practice. See mahamudra
Great Vchicle. See Mahayana Buddhism
gricf, tor-2
grollam, 19
grudges, holding, 103-4
gtum mo, 18
guilt, 149-50
the guru, 11-13
abuses, 12
blessing of, 113-14, 117
buddha nature, as link to, 12
buddha qualities identified with, 12, 29,
162-63, 172
in completion-stage practice, 12-13
covenant with, 12, 73, 171--72
in crcation-stage practice, 12
defects of, 92
desire, working with through prayer to,
39, 41
devotion, 12, 31, 77, 92, 114
disciple, relationship to, 12, 13
empowerment from, 13, 45, 114-15, 150,
151, 159, 167
faith in. 92
initiation from, 13
medication on, 75. 77.97-98
root guru, 113-14
supplication, 117
union with, 12, 77
guru yoga, 75
Gyalwa Yangön, 39, 165
Gyalwang Yongdrupa, 97
Gyurme Tsewang Chogdrup, 19
faith
conviction, 33.49
cmpowerment, increasing through, 151
follower of, 86
as gateway of practice, 31
in guru, 92
importance of, 35
mahamudra, in arising of, 13
supplication, generating through, 117
fatigue, 136, 140-41
fear, 149
feast, sacred, 75, 171, 172
fixation
on kleshas, 96-97
on self, 89, 101, 104, 126
on sense objects, 95, 102–3
food
consecration of, 75, 111, 172
offerings, 75, 172, 173
form body, 11, 103
four noblc truths, 2
four reminders, 87, 89, 94
Francis of Assisi, Saint, 115
H
habit, 45, 67, 109, 133
hatred, renouncing through contemplation
on love, 37
heart-drop teachings, 65. 144
heat, mystic, 18
help. external, 113, 114, 118
186



Index
Herukas, 37. 39, 165
Hevajra empowerment, 151
hidden treasures, 22, 162
Hinayama Buddhism, 3
Hinduism, t12--13
Hundred Dcities of the Holy Family, 172
HUNG AH OM, 77, 153
hungry spirits, 75, 173
ignorance, 95, 104
impermanence, 20, 75, 79, 87, 94, 101
Indestructible Vehicle, s
Indrabhuti of Uddiyana, King, 84
inheritance, purification of, 45, 110
initiation, 13
insight, 83. See alo vipashyana
instant of recollection, 107, 112, 117
intellect, 16, 35, 41, $1, 71, 90, 121. See also cogo
itío )
intelligence, 31, 35, 121, 164
interdependent relationship
introduced, 3, 155
meditation on, 34, 95, 102-3, 121, 164
twelve links, 57, 169
intermediate state berween death and rebirth
consciousness in, 134
dream cxpcrience, preparing for via, 79
purification of, 14, 43, 45, 108, 117
Kadam practice lincage, 157
Kagyu school. See also mahamudra
Gampopa scen as founder of, 159
Great Scal practice, 165
Karma Kagyu subsect, 168, 175
New School, part of, 157
oral instruction lineage, 173
recognition of mind's nature in, 69,
142-43, 147, 151
Upper Drukpa Kagyu, t6s
Kalachakra, 150, 151, 157
Kalu Rinpoche, 158
karma
anger, arising from, 140
completion-stage practice, preventing in,
17
habit, karmic, 133
introduced, 3
mind, role in accumulation of, 53, 55
mindfulness, arrested by, 55, 139-40
river analogy, 55
thought, resulting from, 17, 55, 57, 140
winds, karmic, 152-53
Karma Ngawang Yönten Gyamtso, 81
Karma Pakshi, Second Karmapa, 175
Karma Palden, 8:
Karmapa
First, Dusum Khyenpa, 175
Second, Karma Pakshi, 175
Third, Rangjung Dorje, 51, 124, 126, 168
Fourteenth, Thekchok Dorje, 79, 175
kha 'bar ma, 173
kleshas. See also specific kloshas
abandoning, 87, 88-89, 94, 96, 97
buddha nature obscured by, 99
defined, 156
deity practice, transformation through,
96, 97-98, 116
distancing, 96-97
cmptiness of, 96
exhaustion of, 239
five poisons, 88-89
fixation on, 96-97
habit, 133
ignorance, role in, 95, 104
meditation, working with in, 148-49
recognizing, 96, 97
root of, 94-95, 126
strongest, determining, 88–89
suffering, as cause of, 102
three poisons, 94
Jambhala, 75, 173
Jamgön Kongtrul, 20-24
Creation and Completion, intention in
writing, 1
Kalu Rinpoche said to be manifestation
of 158
literary works, 24-25, 161
Manjusti, said to be manifestation of, 161
names of, 22, 161, 175
Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, 20, 22, 29
jealousy, 88.95, 116
Jagdral Yeshe Dorjc. See Dudjom Rinpoche
jnana, 123. See also cognition
jnanasattvas, 110, 120, 167. See also wisdom
beings
jong wa, 13. See also purification
Jurgek (jur gegt). 173
Kabarma, 173
187



Creation
Completion
knowledge-holder deitics, 49, 75, 167-68, 172
Korlo Demchog. 158. See alo Chakrasamvara
kun sang, 14. See also absorption, meditative
Lamdre practice lincage, 157
Langdarma, King of Tibet, 6, 157
Lesser Vehiclc,
tha, 119
Tha 'i nga rgyal, 16. See also pride, of the deity
life cycle correspondences of visualization
practice, 14-15, 17, 107, 110, 119
lifestyle, integrating practice into, 20, 67, 73,79
liturgical context, 14, 15, 112, 115, 166
love, contemplation on, 37
marks of physical perfection, 10, 45, 47, 103
Marpa, 143
maturation knowledge holders, 49, 78,
167-68
mdzod chen Inga (Jamgön Kongtrul), 24
memory, relation to mindfulness, 137
mental afflictions. See kleshas
merit, 39-40, 45, 94, 117, 118, 132, 167, 169
Middle Way school, 4. 65, 143, 150, 168
Milarepa, 19, 86, 14), 160
mind. See also consciousness; thought
afflictive mind, 51, 53, 55, 57, 87, 133
appearance and, 73
awareness, recognizing nature of through,
143
awareness versus, 67, 145–46
basis, free of, 47, 59, 61
body, at root of, 88,91
buddha nature as true nature of, 99, 128
clarity of, 61, 115, 120–21, 128, 141
concept, formation of, 53, 57, 129, 130,
133-34
consciousness, mental, ss, 100, 12$
control, mental. 7, 37
daily life, recognizing nature of in, 145
deluded mind, si, 53, 57, 123, 127-29
devotion, recognizing nature of through,
122
dharmata, as embodiment of, 122
dregs of, 137, 138-39
duality, role in, 53, 130
emptiness of, 8, 47, 122, 129
incomplete recognition of mind's nature,
M
Machig Labdron, 143, 149, 171
Madhyamaka school, 163, 168. See also
Middle Way school
mahamudra, 147, 165. See also Kagyu school
conditions for arising of, 13, 37
realization stages, 170
recognition of mind's nature, importance
in, 69, 122, 147
shamata, place in, 137, 138
Tibetan Buddhism, place in, 143, 159
tranquility of mind as basis for, 137
Mahayana Buddhism, 4-5, 111
Maitreya, 158
mandala
defined, 197
dissolution procedure, 107
life, mandala correspondence with, is
place in which you find yourself, visualiz-
ing as mandala of yidam, 99
tantra, place in, 5,9
mantra
afflictive emotions, transformation in, 37
breath 25, 77
completion-stage practice, in, 7, 37
crcation-stage practice, in, 7, 37, 110–31
as esoteric aspect of practice, 6
ethical foundation for, 7
intelligence necessary, 35
mental control necessary, 7. 37
neutrality, dispelling using, 148
protectors of, 67
purification of speech through, 110
seed syllables, 1445, 108, 109, 159
tantra, place in, 17
142
instantaneous, 51, 53, 55, 126, 130-31,
132–33, 135, 168
Kagyu teachings, recognition of mind's
naturc in, 69, 142–43. 147. ISI
karma accumulation, role in, 53, 55
lucidity, 129-30, 136, 142
luminosity, 49, 53, 59, 150, 166
meditation, recognizing nature of through
analytical, 150
meditation, resting in, 63, 69, 136, 138
mindfulness, distinction from, 67, 146
occurrence, recognizing nature of
through, 143, 151
path, mind, 63
phenomena, as root of, 37, 49, 53
purified mind, 55, 123
Tcality of, st



Index
nonmeditation, 63, 67, 71, 142, 145
nonsectarianism, 20–21, 23
nonself, 3
nying thig teachings. 144. See also hcart-drop
teachings
Nyingma school, 6, 107–10, 157, 159
od gsal, 8. 167. See also clear light
offerings, 45, 75, 111, 172
OM AH HUNG, 75, 109, 110, 172
OM MA NI PAD ME HUNG, 174
one-pointedness, 61, 170. See also shamata
Orgyen Nyengyu practice lincage, 157
relaxing. 120, 136
residue of, 61
sciflessness of, 49. 104
space, 140
speech, at root of, 88
stillness, recognizing nature of through,
142-43
taming, 87-88,94
rightening, 120, 137, 138, 148
understanding of, 49, 51, 122--27
view as applied to, 33
mindfulness
afflictive emotions, working with through,
73
attachment, liberating through, 5s,
139-
aversion, liberating through, 55, 139--40
awareness-emptiness, 67, 69
clear light ungraspable by, 67
in completion-stage practice, 17-18
conceptual, 146
constancy, 31
in creation-stage practice, 69
of eating, 75
gentleness of, 137
karma accumulation arrested by, ss,
139-
lifestyle, integration in, 20, 67.73
memory, relation to, 137
mind, distinction from, 67, 146
neutrality versu, 69, 71, 148
nondistraction, 142
as peak of practice, 71, 73
resting in, 73
space, absolving in, 71
strengthening, 61, 63
types of, 146
ultimate existence of, 7!
Mipam, 20, 15-16
motivation, 83-84
mystic heat, 18
pacification, 65, 143, 170-71
Padampa Sangye, 143, 170
Padmasambhava, 6, 197, 160, 162, 174
Palpung Monastery, zt, 22, 162
paramitas, III, 172
Path
aspiration, taking as, 99
of awareness, 63, 238, 141
buddha nature, ground, path, fruition
breakdown of, 8, 10
completion stage definition, 89-91
of contrivance, 49
creation stage definition, 89-91
definitive, 35
devotion, place in, 91-92
Dharma, gaining certainty in, 84-87
Dharma, understanding. 87-89
gradual. 35, 63,93
help, external, 113, 114, 118
of liberation, 19
of method, 19, 164
middle path, 4
mind path, 63
provisional path, 35, 164
pure vision, necessity of, 91-92
qualitics of, understanding, 93
self assessment, 93
shorter versus longer, 35
sutra path, 94
of tantra, 94
truth, understanding of relative and
absolute, 93
Vajrayana path, 94
Pema Nyinje Wangpo, 21, 22, 162
perfection, marks of physical, 10, 41, 47, 103
Nagarjuna, 31, $I, 163
Naropa, 86
neutrality. 53, 67, 69, 71, 148, 152
New School, 157. See also Sarma
nirmanakaya, 11, 108, 161
nirvana, 2, 172
nonaction, 33
nondistraction, 63, 71, 142
789



Creation or Completion
fruition of, 10, 15, 41, 47, 98
of habitual patterns, 45, 109
of intermediate state between death and
rebirth, 14, 43, 45, 108, 117
of kleshas, 89
medical analogies, 43
of meditative absorption obscurations, 41
of mind, 55, 123
noncomposite realm of reality, basis in, 8,
41
recollection of purity, 15--16, tor
of relationships with others, 117, 118
ritual, role in, 43, 45
of skills, 45
of speech, 45, 110
that which is to be purified, 13, 41
that which purifies, 13, 41, 43, 99
phenomena. Se also reality
attachment, appearance arising from, 73
awareness, created without, as
clarity of appearance, 99
cmprincss of, 3-4
intelligence, understanding through, 31
interrelated nature of 3
mind as root of, 37, 49, 53
pure foundation, 51
truth, subsumed under, 38
pho ba, 18
phrog ma, 173
phyag mishan, 34
phyag gya, 18
phyag rgya chen po. See mahamudra
the Plunderer, 75. 173
poisons
three poisons, 94
five poisons, 89
practice lincages, 6, 157
prajna, 86, 163
prana, 116, 166
precious human birth, 29
pride
of the deity, 16, 47, 101
klesha of, 88, 94, 95, 116
The Profound Inner Meaning (Rangjung
Dorje), 124, 126
progress, evaluating, 145
Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness
(Tsultrim Gyamtso), 101, 164
prostration practice, 112
psychology, Buddhist, 37
pure vision, s. 91-92, 118, 156-57
purification
of birthright inheritance, 45, 110
body of reality, basis in, 41, 47
buddha naturc, basis in, 8, 10, 41, 43, 99,
III
buddha nature, fruition in, 10, 11!
of cognitive obscurations, 41, 90
in completion-stage practice, 61
of conception/birth, 43, 44, 104-6, 109:
Rangjung Dorje, Third Karmapa, st, 124,
126, 168
Ramagotravibhaga. 158. See also Umaratantra
Ratnasambhava, 96, 116
scality. See also phenomena
bare apprchension of, 71
body of, 10-11, 15, 41, 47, 103, 158, 165
completion-stage practice, perception in,
33
creation of, 9, 15, 131, 132
of mind, si
pure foundation, 51
realm of. 41, 158, 165
tnje perception of, 9, 33, 61
uncontrived, 67, 69
recollection, instant of, 107, 112, 117
refuge, 45, III, 112
regret, 89
renunciation, 7. 31, 33, 87, 89, 94
repulsiveness, contemplation on, 37, 94
respect, 91
Resultant Vehicle, 8, 157
rgyu, 14. See also absorption, mcdicative
popud bla ma. See Uraratantra
rigpa, 138, 170
nin chen gter mozod Damgön Kongtrul), 25
Guru Rinpoche, 143. See ako Padmasambhava
ritual, 14, 43, 45
rmi lam, 18. See ako dream yoga
rupakaya, II, 169
of confusion, 98-99
in creation-stage practice, 13-14, 15-16, 41.
43, 61, 110
of death experience, 43. 45, 110, 117
of delusion, 41, 43
of emotional obscurations, 41, 90
of enjoyment of sense objects, 45
190



Index
sadhan2, 14
Sakya school, 6, 157
samadhi, 14, 108, 145. Se also absorption,
meditative
samaya, 12, 171–72
sambhogakaya, 11, 108, 114, 158,17
samsara, 2, 87, 90, 99, 163. See also cyclic exis-
tence
Sarma tradition, 107-10, 157, 159. Soc also
New School.
sbyong ba, 13. See also purification
School of the Elders, 3
Secret Mantra Vehicle, 7. 157, 164, 171
sced syllabics, 14. 4$, 108, 109, 159
the self
empriness misconstrued as, 8-9, 53, 129,
Sonam Pel, 21
songs, instructional, 86
space, 69, 71, 147
specch, 45, 88, FIO
suffering
cause of, 3, 95, 96, 102, 113
cessation of, 2-3
cyclic existence, inherent to, 9
gricf, 101-2
truth of 2
sugatagarbha, 99, 131, 156, 158, 265. See also
buddha nature
sutra approach, 6–7, 37, 121
The Sutra of Recalling the Jewels. 75
sutras, 5, 156
130
Tai Situpa, 162. See also Pema Nyinje
Wangpo
tantra, s
deity visualization practice place in, $, 9
father tantra of method, 136
the guru, place in, 11-13
in Hinduisit,
lifestyle, S, 20
mandala visualization practice place in, s,
fixation on, 89, 101, 104, 126
nonscłf, 3
self assessment, 93
sem, 124. See also mind
seminal drops, 18, 160, 165, 171
sentient beings, 140
severance, 65, 143, 149, 170-71
sexual yoga, 18, 19-20, 39
sgrub thabs, 14
shamata. See also abiding, calm
beginning practice, as, 94, 137, 138
breath arrested during profound, 153
consciousness involved in, 127
crcation-stage practice compared, 115,
120-21
in dzogchen, 138, 141
in mahamudra tradition, 137, 138
mental stability, role in gencrating, 120,
141-42
neutrality versus, 148
resting in, 136
vipashyana, relationship to, 83, 121
Shangpa practice lincage, 157
Shantarakshita, 6, 157
shastras, 85
shepa, 123. See also cognition
shes bya mdzod (Jamgön Kongtrul), 24
Shije practice lincage, 157. See ala pacification
Shrimen, 79
siddhi, 114
skillful means, 2
sleep, 77, 129-30, 174. See ako dream yoga
sleepiness in meditation, 89, 140-45
mantra, placc in, 5, 7
mother tantra of knowledge, 136
nondual tantra of the essential meaning,
136
path of, 94
as Resultant Vehicke, &, 157
Tashi Tso, 20
thabs lam, 19
theg mchog rdo rịc, 175
Thckchok Dorjc, Fourteenth Karmapa, 79,
Theravaden Buddhism, 3
thought. See also mind
angry thought, 71, 133, 140
blocking, 63
dcity visualizarion practice, pursuing dur-
ing, 39. 47
desirous thought, 37, 39, 41
dissolution process, 167
fruition of practice, in, 59, 61
karma resulting from, 17, 55, 57, 140
as meditation object, 41, 65, 144
meditation on that which recognizes, 144
meditation, recognizing during, 135
19!



Creation
Completion
vijnana, 123. See also consciousness
Vimalamitra, 65, 143, 171
vipashyana, 83, 127, 127, 136, 142, 170
virtue, 6-7, 3751, 55, 168-69
vision, pure, 5. 91-92, 118, 156-57
vital drops, 45, 105-5, 116
meditation, working with in, 47, 63, 137.
149-50
pacifying, 69, 101, 149
pure, relating to as other than, 10
as radiance of emptiness, 17
in severance practice, 149
undercurrent of, 137
virtuous, 55
threc elements, 100-TOI
Three Jewels, 31, 163
Three Roots, 31, 163
the three states, 147-49
thugs yid dbyer med, 12
thun nang ma yin a ! Czed (Jangón
Kongtrul), 25
Tibetan Buddhism, 6–7, 107-8, 143
tig-ic, 106
Tiłopa, 86
ting nge 'dzin, 14. See also absorption, medi-
tative
torpor, 71, 140
tranquility meditation. See shamata
transliteration system used in this book, xi
treasures, hidden, 22, 162
The Treasun of instructions (Jamgön
Kongtrul), 25
The Treasury of Kagyu Mantra (Jamgön
Kongtrul), 24
The Treasury of Precious Treasure (Jamgön
Kongtrul), 25, 160
Trisong Detsen, King of Tibet, 6, 157
Trokma, 173
truth
absolute, 4, 35, 93, 156, 164
defined, 35
relative, 4, 35, 93, 156, 164
Tsandra Rinchen Trak, 22
Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche, 164,
166, 167
tulkus, 161, 175
Wheel of existence, 57, 169
Wheel of Sublime Bliss, 158, 165
Wheel of the Dharma, 2-5, 7. 155
winds
five vital winds, 152, 169
ten vital winds, 59, 152, 169
channels, 19, 69, 77, 152, 160, 171, 174
duality, vital winds of, 77
intermediate wind, 77
karmic winds, 152–53
physical body, of, 45, 59, 152, 169
wisdom winds, 192-53
wisdom
accumulation of, 45, 167, 169
actual wisdom, 135
afflictive emotions as aspects of, 159-60
arising of, 71, 75, 77, 132
certainty in the Dharma, role in cultivat-
ing, 84
of discernment, 37. 164
of examplc, 135
foundation wisdom, 55
mind's truc nature as seed of. 99
pristine wisdom of realization, 59
virtue imprinted on, 55
winds of, 152-53
wisdom beings, 45, 110
wrathful deitics, 75, 165, 171, 172
Uttaratantra, 10-11, 158, 168-69
yeshe, 123. See also cognition
yidam, 11, 91, 99, 114-15, 163. See ako dcity
visualization practice
yogas
completion-stage practice, associated with,
18, 174
dream yoga, 18, 77, 79
purification, role in, 43
sexual yoga, 18, 19-20, 39
yogatantras, 45, 166
Vairochana, 96, 116
vajra friends, 162
vajra holders, 45, 105, 106, 109-10, 165, 166
Vajradhara, 39, 41, 47, 79
Vajrasattva practice, 71, 89, 172, 171
Vajrayana, 5
192



About the Translator
SARAH HARDING was born in Malibu in 1951 and educated in Los Angeles,
California. She studied English literature and anthropology at Prescott
College in Arizona, and earned a degree in religious studies from Naropa
University in Boulder, Colorado. Sarah spent three years traveling through
Europe, Africa, and Asia, and while abroad, she studied Tibetan language
and culture for two years in Darjeeling, India, and in Kathmandu, Nepal.
In 1974, Sarah returned to the United States to continue her studies in
Tibetan culture and language. Her interests in Tibetan and Buddhist
studies culminated in her participation in the first traditional three-year
meditation and study retreat for Westerners, which was conducted entirely
in Tibetan, under the guidance of Venerable Kalu Rinpoche near Dijon,
France.
Berween 1980 and 1992, Sarah served as the resident Dharma teacher
and translator in Los Angeles and later in Santa Fe, New Mexico. She has
done extensive oral translation internationally for such renowned teachers
as Kalu Rinpoche, Chagdud Tulku, Tenga Rinpoche, Khenpo Tsultrim
Gyamtso, Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche, and Gangreng Rinpoche. Sarah is
a founding member of the International Buddhist Translation Committee
and a member of the Nalanda Translation Committee. Her prolific career
as a translator includes more than thirty-five translations of traditional
Buddhist texts as well as the Tibetan Language Correspondence Course,
co-authored with Jeremy Morrelli. From 1992 until the present, she has
been a faculty member in Buddhist Studies at Naropa University. Sarah
continues to make her home in Boulder, where she is currently working on
her next book.
193



Also from Wisdom Publications
The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism
Its Fundamentals and History
Dudjom Rinpoche
Translated, edited, and annotated by Matthew
Kapstein and Gyurme Dorje
1584 pages, ISBN 0-86171-199-8, $90.00
An absolute treasure for students of the tradition,
this book is also an indispensable reference for
anyone with an interest in Buddhism. It also includes chronologies
and glossaries that elucidare Buddhist doctrine, and provides fascinat-
ing insights into the Buddhist history of Tibet. Two treatises form the
present volume, namely The Fundamentals of the Nyingma School and
The History of the Nyingma School Among the most widely read of all
His Holiness Dudjom Rinpoche's works, these treatises were com-
posed during the years immediately following his arrival in India as a
refugee. His intention in writing them was to preserve the precise
structure of the Nyingma philosophical view within its own historical
and cultural context.



A Song for the King
Saraha on Mahamudra Meditation
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
192 pages, ISBN 0-86171-503-9, $14.95
"A Song for the King is the most important work in
a generation about the pithiest and deepest of
Saraha's great trilogy of Indian Buddhist tantric
songs. Michele Martin's translation and annota-
tions are lucid and well informed, and Thrangu Rinpoche's learned
but accessible commentary allows readers to use Saraha's work as a
key to seeing, meditating, and acting in the profound Indo-Tibetan
tradition of mahamudra, the great seal of reality." Roger Jackson,
author of Tantric Treasures: Three Collections of Mystical Verse from
Buddhist India
Essentials of Mahamudra
Looking Directly at the Mind
Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche
352 pages, ISBN 0-86171-371-0, $16.95
Essentials of Mahamudra is a commentary on Tashi
Namgyal's famous Moonlight of Mahamudra...a
text that the sixteenth Karmapa had identified as
the most valuable for Westerners, Khenchen
Thrangu Rinpoche recognized that Western meditators don't just
need to know how to maintain our meditation practice-umwe need to
know why we should do it. Unmatched in its directness, Essentials of
Mahamudra addresses both these needs, rendering one of the most
advanced forms of meditation more easily adaptable to our everyday
lives.



Wisdom Publications
TV TISDOM PUBLICATIONS, a nonprofit publisher, is dedicated to making avail-
W able authentic works relating to Buddhism for the benefit of all. We pub-
fish books by ancient and modern masters in all traditions of Buddhism, transla-
tions of important texts, and original scholarship. Additionally, we offer books
chat explore East-West themes unfolding as traditional Buddhism encounters our
modern culture in all its aspects. Our cicles are published with the appreciation
of Buddhism as a living philosophy, and with the special commitment to pre-
serve and transmit important works from Buddhism's many traditions.
To learn more about Wisdom, or to browse books online, visit our website ar
www.wisdompubs.org.
You may request a copy of our catalog online or by writing to this address:
Wisdom Publications
199 Elm Street
Somerville, Massachusetts 02144 USA
Telephone: 617-776-7416
Fax: 617-776-7841
Email: info@wisdompubs.org
www.wisdompubs.org
The Wisdom Trust
As a nonprofit publisher, Wisdom is dedicated to the publication of Dharma books
for the benefit of all sentient beings and dependent upon the kindness and gen-
erosity of sponsors in order to do so. If you would like to make a donation to Wis-
dom, you may do so through our website or our Somerville office. If you would like
to help sponsor the publication of a book, please write or email us at the address
above.
Thank you.
Wisdom is a nonprofit, charitabic 501(c)(3) organization affiliated with the Foundation for the Preser-
vation of the Mahayana Tradition (FPMT).



EASTERN RELIGION BUDDHISM
Walk the path of tantra—from creation to completion.
reation and Completion represents some of the most profound teachings of
Jamgön Kongtrul (1813-99), one of the true spiritual and literary giants
of Tibetan history. Though brief, these teachings offer a lifetime of advice
for all who wish to engage in and deepen—the practice of tantric Buddhist
meditation.
The original text, beautifully translated and introduced by Sarah Harding, is
further brought to life by an in-depth commentary by the contemporary master
Thrangu Rinpoche. Key Tibetan Buddhist fundamentals are quickly made clear,
so that the reader may contidently enter into tantra's oft-misunderstood cre-
ation" and "completion" stages.
In the creation stage, practitioners visualize themselves in the form of buddhas
and other enlightened beings in order to break down their own ordinary con-
cepts of themselves and the world around them. This meditation practice prepares
the mind for engaging in the completion stage, where one has a direct encounter
with the ultimate nature of mind and reality
"Kongtrul's writings shine with lucidity and transparency.
Sarah Harding has rendered a great service."
-Ken McLeod, author of Wake Up to Your Life
** An excellent book."-Religious Studies Review
"Creation and completion meditation is the cornerstone of tantric
Buddhist practice, and draws upon a rich array of techniques and
presumptions relating to moral cultivation. This book will be of great
interest to both scholars and practitioners of tantric Buddhism."
-Janet Gyatso, Hershey Chair of Buddhist Studies, Harvard University
KHI NCHIN THRANGU RINPOCHE is one of the most highly respected lamas of the
Kagyu lineage with students around the world. The author of many books, he is the sen-
ior tutor to His Holiness the Seventeenth Karmapa. Ogyen Trinley Dorje.
SARAH HARDING has been a Tibetan Buddhist translator and practitioner since 1974. She
is the author of The Life and Revelations of Peru Lingpa. She has served for sixteen years
as a faculty member at Naropa University in Boulder, Colorado.
ISBN 0-86171-312-5 US$16.95
ISBN 13: 978-0-8617-1312.7
5 1695
Boston
Wisdom Publethon
www wisdompulsory
Produced with Environmental Mindfulness
917808611713127
